Also by Mel Robbins


BOOKS

The High 5 Habit: Take Control of Your Life with One Simple Habit*

The 5 Second Rule: Transform Your Life, Work, and Confidence with Everyday Courage

The High 5 Daily Journal*


AUDIOBOOK ORIGINALS

Take Control of Your Life: How to Silence Fear

and Win the Mental Game

Reinvent Your Life

Here’s Exactly What to Do: Simple Tools for a Happier You

Start Here: Pep Talks for Life

Kick Ass: Life-Changing Advice from the author of The 5 Second Rule

Work It Out: The New Rules for Women to Get Ahead at Work


*Available from Hay House

Please visit:

Hay House USA: www.hayhouse.com®

Hay House Australia: www.hayhouse.com.au

Hay House UK: www.hayhouse.co.uk

Hay House India: www.hayhouse.co.in





Copyright © 2024 by Mel Robbins

Published in the United States by: Hay House LLC: www.hayhouse.com®

Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Publishing Pty Ltd: www.hayhouse.com.au

Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.uk

Published in India by: Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.in

Lines from “The Summer Day” by Mary Oliver reprinted by the permission of The Charlotte Sheedy Literary Agency as agent for the author. Copyright © 1990, 2006, 2008, 2017 by Mary Oliver with permission of Bill Reichblum.

Project editor: Melody Guy

Cover design: Pete Garceau

Interior design and illustrations: Julie Davison

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.

The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. In the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-4019-7136-6

Autographed ISBN: 978-1-4019-9706-9

E-book ISBN: 978-1-4019-7137-3





For my daughter Sawyer,

who co-wrote this book with me.

I have loved sharing this experience with you,

even though there were times you wanted to kill me.

As they say, Let Them.





Table of Contents


Introduction: My Story


The Let Them Theory

1 Stop Wasting Your Life on Things You Can’t Control

2 Getting Started: Let Them + Let Me


You and the Let Them Theory

Managing Stress

3 Shocker: Life Is Stressful

4 Let Them Stress You Out

Fearing Other People’s Opinions

5 Let Them Think Bad Thoughts about You

6 How to Love Difficult People

Dealing with Someone Else’s Emotional Reactions

7 When Grown-Ups Throw Tantrums

8 The Right Decision Often Feels Wrong

Overcoming Chronic Comparison

9 Yes, Life Isn’t Fair

10 How to Make Comparison Your Teacher


Your Relationships and the Let Them Theory

Mastering Adult Friendship

11 The Truth No One Told You about Adult Friendship

12 Why Some Friendships Naturally Fade

13 How to Create the Best Friendships of Your Life

Motivating Other People to Change

14 People Only Change When They Feel Like It

15 Unlock the Power of Your Influence

Helping Someone Who Is Struggling

16 The More You Rescue, The More They Sink

17 How to Provide Support the Right Way

Choosing the Love You Deserve

18 Let Them Show You Who They Are

19 How to Take Your Relationship to the Next Level

20 How Every Ending Is a Beautiful Beginning

Conclusion: Your Let Me Era Is Here

Appendix

How to Apply Let Them to Parenting

How to Apply Let Them to Teams

Let Me Acknowledge You

Bibliography

About Mel

How to Stay in Touch with Me





INTRODUCTION



My Story

At the age of 41, I found myself $800,000 in debt, unemployed, and watching my husband’s restaurant business crumble. It felt like we had failed at life with no hope of ever escaping the debt.

I enviously watched as my friends found success after success in their careers while we struggled to get groceries on the table. I had just been laid off and had no idea what to do with my life: I’d already tried being a public defender for the Legal Aid Society in New York City, being a lawyer in a large firm in Boston, working for a few start-ups, doing business development at an advertising agency, becoming a life coach, hosting a call-in radio show, and even opening a small paint-your-own-pottery-studio. I felt completely lost, like nothing I did would ever be enough to dig us out of the hole we were in.

To deal with the anxiety and self-doubt, my main strategy became avoidance. Avoid getting up by hitting the snooze button. Avoid the pain with alcohol. Avoid responsibility by blaming my husband. Avoid looking for a job by procrastinating however I could.

If you’ve ever been in this situation, you understand how monumental even the simplest tasks seem: getting out of bed, opening your bills, being fully present with your family, cooking a nice meal, applying for a job, going for a walk, canceling that subscription, or even just being honest about the extent to which you’re struggling. . . Everything feels impossible. Every morning when I woke up, the anxiety was coursing through my veins, and I thought, Is this really what it’s going to look like for the rest of my life?

But you want to know the funny thing about being stuck? I knew exactly what I needed to do: get up, tackle the dreaded pile of bills, get the kids ready for school, make myself go on walks, reach out to my friends for support, make a budget, find a job. And yet, I couldn’t seem to do any of it.





How I Changed My Life


I’ll never forget the morning when everything changed for me. The alarm went off, and there I was, lying in bed, completely overwhelmed by our problems. Like so many of us, I was paralyzed by my own thoughts, and the last thing I wanted to do was get up and face another day.

But then, something strange happened. A thought popped into my head that would ultimately change my life. It was so simple, almost silly. I remembered watching a rocket launch and the way NASA counted down to blast off: 5-4-3-2-1. I thought, What if I just counted backward like that and launched myself out of bed?

It seemed ridiculous, but I was desperate, so I gave it a shot. I counted backward: 5-4-3-2-1—and I got out of bed. Just like that. I didn’t think about how tired I was or how much I didn’t want to face my problems. I simply moved before my brain had the chance to talk me out of it. It’s like launching a rocket: Once you start the countdown, 5-4-3-2-1, there’s no turning back.

At that point in my life, I was so used to letting my thoughts paralyze me and fear and stress consume me that the concept felt completely foreign. I remember what a revelation it was when I thought to myself, Wait a minute, I can feel horrible and still do what I need to do? Yes, Mel, you can. And it worked.

In those five seconds, I had interrupted the cycle of overthinking. It felt like a small victory, but it was also a revelation. If I could push through those five seconds of fear, maybe I could push through anything.

So, I started using this countdown everywhere in my life.

5-4-3-2-1 Get up when the alarm rings.

5-4-3-2-1 Pick up the phone and start networking to find a job.

5-4-3-2-1 Open the bills that had been piling up on the counter for months.

I started calling this the “5 Second Rule.” One 5-second move at a time, I forced myself to put one foot in front of the other and slowly step back into my life. I won’t lie to you. It wasn’t easy. The next couple of years were among the hardest of my life.

It’s not easy to claw your way out of debt or face the painful issues in your marriage. It’s not easy to quiet the anxiety or push through the self-doubt. It’s hard to update your résumé and look for a job when you question the value you bring. It’s a grind to force yourself to get back in shape and create healthier habits after you’ve let yourself go.

And it’s definitely not glamorous to work all day, then come home, take care of three kids, spend a few minutes with my husband, and then stay up late every night, trying to figure out ways I can make more money.

But that’s what I did.

The 5 Second Rule taught me that action is the answer. Thinking about your problems will never solve them. Waiting around to feel like doing something means you’ll never do it. It taught me that no one is coming to save you. You must save yourself from yourself. You have to force yourself to make little moves forward, all day, every day, especially when you don’t feel like it.

Using 5-4-3-2-1, I pushed through the excuses, the anxiety, the overwhelm, and the fear. And step by step, day by day, week by week, I slowly took the actions that put my life and career back on track. My husband started using it to push himself to face the issues in his business head-on, and it worked for him too. But it would be another three years before I told anyone else about the 5 Second Rule. I had been reluctant to share it with anyone because, first, I didn’t know why it worked. And second, I didn’t feel like I was in a position to give anybody advice.

But that all changed one fateful day when an old roommate recommended me as the “perfect person” to give advice on career change at a small event. I suppose she thought of me because I had changed my career so many times, even I had lost count. The event offered to fly me and my husband to San Francisco and put us up in a hotel. When you’re struggling financially, that sounds like a free vacation, so I said yes. This was the first time I had ever given a speech on a stage at an event. The only public-speaking class I had ever taken was in high school, and as soon as I boarded the plane, that’s when the panic started to sink in: What on earth have I gotten myself into?

When I walked on stage and saw 700 people in the audience staring back at me, my mind went blank, and I could feel my chest and neck turning red.

I then proceeded to have a 21-minute-long anxiety attack onstage. About 19 minutes in, I forgot how to end my talk on career change, so I blurted out the 5 Second Rule and how I use it, because I couldn’t think of anything else to say. I must have blacked out, because I also don’t remember the part where I gave everyone in the audience my email address. And as I walked off that stage, I thought that was the worst experience of my life. Thank God it’s over.

It turns out that small event was one of the first TEDx conferences ever held. They filmed it, and a year later, posted the video online. Not only did it go viral—it’s become one of the most watched TEDx talks of all time. The 5 Second Rule and its 5-4-3-2-1 countdown spread by word of mouth around the world. As it spread, people started to write to me at that email address, sharing stories about how the Rule was changing their lives. I was so moved by people’s stories that I would sit up late at night, after I had put our three kids to bed, answering their emails one by one.

When I had been drowning in my problems, I felt like I was the only one who had trouble doing the things I needed to do. It’s not true. We all struggle with motivation. It’s a universal problem, and the 5 Second Rule seems to be a solution that not only works for me but also works for people all over the world.

The stories were amazing: People had used 5-4-3-2-1 to push through fear, procrastination, and excuses to change jobs; lose 100 pounds; get sober; launch and sell businesses; improve their health and marriages. The medical and clinical uses blew me away. Doctors and psychologists were using it to treat PTSD, OCD, and depression. Even as I’m writing this Introduction, we have heard from over a thousand people who have used the 5 Second Rule to stop themselves from attempting suicide and to ask for help.

As that TEDx talk became more and more popular online, I started getting invited to speak at other small events. I remember being asked to talk to a group of Realtors at a bar. It was embarrassing standing there with a beer in my hand, trying to talk over the music and people gabbing in the next room. But I survived. I spoke in church basements, a high school classroom, then a friend’s brown-bag lunch at work, and it just grew from there.

I would break out in hives as I held the microphone, and I wasn’t getting paid. But the more I talked about the Rule and saw how powerful it was for everyone who tried it, the more I became obsessed with understanding why such a simple hack could lead to such profound results.

So, I put my lawyer hat on and started researching habits, human behavior, and the science of motivation. I needed to make a case: Why does counting 5-4-3-2-1 work? I gathered evidence from the experiences of ordinary people who had been using it. I found compelling precedent from the accounts of therapists, addiction specialists, and medical doctors who had begun recommending it to their patients, and all the evidence pointed to a simple explanation:





Small, Consistent Action Changes Everything


Meanwhile, my friends and extended family had no idea what I was doing because I was too scared to tell them. Mel? Giving advice? Give me a break. She nearly destroyed her own life.

At this point in my story, my husband had left the restaurant business and was struggling with depression. We were still drowning in debt, so I was working a full-time job trying to keep our family of five afloat while dedicating nights and weekends to speaking at small events and basically writing a dissertation on the science of motivation on the side.

I knew I wanted to teach the 5 Second Rule full-time and somehow make this my career, but I didn’t know how. Looking back, I can see how paralyzed I was with imposter syndrome. What right did I have to call myself an expert in anything? I suppose I was just waiting for some kind of permission to put myself out there.

Maybe you’re doing that right now. Waiting for the right time. Waiting to feel ready or a little less afraid. Waiting for someone to come along and tell you that today is the day to start. The problem with waiting is no one is coming. The only permission you need is your own.

Deciding to get serious about trying to make money as a motivational speaker was one of the best decisions I have made in my life. I’ll share more with you about what led to this breakthrough in the pages of this book.

Once I started getting paid, I put every dollar toward chipping away at our debt. That first year I gave 17 paid speeches. The next year, it was 47, and I was able to quit my day job. I couldn’t believe what was happening. By the third year, it was 99 speeches plus a 24-city tour with JPMorganChase. I had become the most-booked female speaker in the world. I was being hired by companies I admired.

How did this happen? By forcing myself out of bed on those mornings I didn’t feel like it. Learning how to push yourself to take action when you are afraid or full of self-doubt or overwhelmed with excuses is a life skill you can learn. Once you master it, you’ll understand that you can achieve anything through small, consistent moves forward.

I found myself on the road 150 days a year, standing on stages teaching the 5 Second Rule and the science of motivation while my husband stayed home and took care of our three kids. Word about the Rule and my skill onstage grew and grew. One event had 27,000 people in the audience. CEOs from the world’s top brands, professional athletes, medical doctors, neuroscientists, and bestselling authors had begun recommending my work to others. I started a newsletter because I no longer had time to respond to people’s emails personally. I eventually wrote to the team at TEDx and asked if they could remove my email from the video online.

When people would ask if I had a Ph.D. or if I was a therapist, I would say, “No, I learned everything the hard way—by screwing up my own life and then having to fix it.”

Armed with years of experience, evidence, testimony, and research, I was finally ready to make my case in the form of a book. In 2017, I self-published The 5 Second Rule.

The 5 Second Rule went on to become the most successful self-published audiobook in history, and the sixth most read book of the year on Amazon. That book has now been read by millions of people and translated into 41 languages.

Over the years of traveling across the country speaking on stages, I learned three important things: First, most of us are just trying to do our best to get ahead, pay our bills, raise a family, fall in love, have more fun, and reach the potential of our lives. We’re just looking for simple ways to be a little happier and make our lives a little better. And we’re not only looking for those resources for ourselves—we are looking for the people in our lives who need them too.

Second, I’ve been told over and over again that I have this amazing ability to distill complex ideas and scientific research into simple, actionable advice that anyone can use to improve their life.

And third, nothing brings me more joy than sharing what I am learning with people like you.

So I have made it my mission to find and share many simple tools to help anyone create a better life. And the “simple” part is key, because if you remember it, you’ll use it. For example, did you know that high-fiving yourself in the mirror is one of the fastest ways to rewire your mindset for self-confidence? Me either, and once I learned about it, I dug into the research and it became the topic of my New York Times bestselling book The High 5 Habit.

The more results people achieved using the 5 Second Rule and the High 5 Habit, the more organizations, media companies, and corporate brands asked me to create programming for their teams and audiences.

So I launched 143 Studios, a Boston-based production company that produces award-winning content, events, audio series, online courses, journals, books, and professional development education for partners like Starbucks, Audible, Ulta Beauty, JPMorganChase, LinkedIn, and Headspace.

In 2022, we launched and started producing The Mel Robbins Podcast, which airs in 194 countries and is one of the top-ranked podcasts in the entire world. We’ve created free online courses that more than a million students have completed. And that little newsletter I created way back when is now read twice a week by a million and a half people. You can learn more about my media production company, the podcast, my newsletter, and our courses at www.melrobbins.com.

For everything I have accomplished, I had no prior experience or the “proper” credentials to pursue. I just made myself do it.

I was 41 when I had that anxiety attack on the TEDx stage. I was 46 when I got my first speaking paycheck. I was 49 when I self-published my first book. I was 50 when I started my production company. And I was 54 when I launched one of the fastest-growing podcasts in the world.

My life didn’t change because of one thing that I did; it changed because of the thousands of mornings where I woke up and didn’t feel like getting out of bed, but I 5-4-3-2-1 made myself do it.





Changing My Life Wasn’t Glamorous; It Was Grueling.


I didn’t achieve success or financial freedom because of some secret. I did it because I was willing to do what most people won’t: I woke up every day, and regardless of how I felt, I kept slowly chipping away at my goals for over a decade, a painstakingly slow process.

Some days, all I focused on was just trying to be a little better than I was the day before. Often that’s all you need to do. I am not special, or different, or gifted, or lucky; I just found the tools that worked for me and I used them. Today, my entire career and life’s purpose is sharing those tools with you.

I don’t say any of this to brag. I say this to tell you that you have no idea what you’re capable of, and neither did I. Through action, I have achieved some extraordinary things, and so can you.

You’ll never feel ready to change your life. One day, you just get tired of your own excuses and force yourself to do it. You’re never going to feel like going to the gym. One day you just make yourself go. You’re never going to feel like having that hard conversation. One day you just get sick of avoiding it, and you force yourself to start it. You’ll never feel like looking for a better job. One day you just push yourself to start looking.

5-4-3-2-1 will help you push through your own internal obstacles and take action when you don’t feel motivated to do so. And if you use it for long enough, you’ll be shocked by what you can achieve.

The 5 Second Rule works because it helps you win the internal battle you have with yourself. But here’s what it can’t do: It can’t remove the external battles you have to fight every day. No matter how many times you count 5-4-3-2-1, it won’t stop the traffic jams, or inconsiderate strangers, or a micromanaging boss, or your family’s endless judgment, guilt trips, passive comments, and demands. And one thing I know for sure, the more you say 5-4-3-2-1 and push yourself to change, the more you’ll wish other people would change too.

That brings us to this book.

For the past decade, I’ve been so focused on discovering, creating, teaching, and sharing simple ways you and I can improve ourselves. But in all this time, I have never tackled the number one factor (based on research) that determines whether you and I live a healthy and happy life: relationships. That’s where the Let Them Theory comes into play. It’s time we talk about how to effectively deal with other people and the surprising secret to creating better relationships with everyone in your life.

Two years ago, I stumbled upon these two words: Let Them, and it was like flipping a switch in my life.

The 5 Second Rule changed my relationship with myself.

The Let Them Theory changed my relationship with other people.

Let me explain.

The 5 Second Rule is about SELF-improvement. It will help you get YOURSELF out of bed on tough days, get to the gym, sit down and start writing, open your mountain of bills, take the risk, sign up for the class, finally look at your bank statement, do the last two weeks of laundry, or take the AI coding class you know you need to take.

Every time you count 5-4-3-2-1, you will push YOURSELF through hesitation, procrastination, overthinking, and doubt. You’ll teach YOURSELF how to take action no matter how you feel. That’s why it works.

But over the years I have wondered, Why do I need to constantly force myself to move forward? Why am I so afraid of failing? Why am I so nervous about taking a risk? Why do I have a hard time asking for what I need? What exactly is in my way?

Have you ever truly stopped and considered these questions for yourself: Why do you hesitate? What is it that is causing you to procrastinate? Or feel so tired? Or overthink every decision? What’s underneath all that doubt? What is stopping you from doing what you need to do or living your life the way you want to live it? What are you afraid of?

I was shocked when I discovered the answer for myself: It was other people. Or rather, how I was letting other people impact me. I was spending too much time and energy managing or worrying about other people. What they do, what they say, what they think, how they feel, and what they expect from me. The reality is, no matter how hard you try or what you do, you cannot control other people. And yet, you live your life as if you can.

You live as though, if you say the right things, people will like you. If you keep taking on more work, your boss will respect you. If you act in the right way, and cater to what your mom wants, and also keep your friends happy, somehow you’ll find peace. You won’t.

In this book, you’ll learn how two words—Let Them—can set you free. Free from the opinions, drama, and judgment of others. Free from the exhausting cycle of trying to manage everything and everyone around you.

There is a better way to live.

The Let Them Theory is a proven method that teaches you how to protect your time and energy, and focus on what matters to you. You’ve spent too long chasing approval, managing other people’s happiness, and letting their opinions hold you back. Learn how to stop giving your power away and start creating a life where you come first—your dreams, your goals, your happiness. But the best part? The Let Them Theory doesn’t just change your life for the better—it transforms the lives of everyone around you too.





How This Book Will Benefit You


This book covers the Let Them Theory, what it is, why it works, and how to use it in eight key areas of your life where you’ve been trying to control things that you simply cannot control. It is packed with research, evidence, and stories of how you can apply the Let Them Theory—and you’ll learn that this approach is supported by ancient philosophies, therapeutic modalities, and the core teachings of the world’s major religions, Stoicism, and spiritual practices.

While much of what you’re about to learn is supported by scientific research, this is not a textbook or an academic paper. This book is meant to be a guide to applying the Let Them Theory and these principles in the most important areas of your life. That’s why it is written in a way that’s easy to understand, fun to read, and filled with relatable stories and specific takeaways. Plus, you’ll find summaries at the end of each section so the key takeaways are at your fingertips, and you can immediately put to use what you’re learning.

I cannot wait for you to read this book and apply everything you learn. You’ll quickly see how you’ve tied your happiness to other people’s behavior, opinions, and feelings. The result? You’ve unknowingly sabotaged your ability to be happier, healthier, and get what you want.

That ends with this book.

If you can promise yourself that you’ll stick with me through this book, read, absorb, and immediately start implementing what you learn, I guarantee you: Your life will get a little easier and your relationships will get so much better.

This will be one of the most liberating and empowering things you will ever experience. And it all begins with two simple words: Let Them.





The Let Them Theory



Let Them + Let Me





CHAPTER 1



Stop Wasting Your Life on Things You Can’t Control

If you’re struggling to change your life, achieve your goals, or feel happier, I want you to hear this: The problem isn’t you. The problem isthe power you unknowingly give to other people.

We all do it, often without realizing it. You make the mistake of thinking that if you say the right thing, everyone will be satisfied. If you bend over backward, maybe your partner won’t be disappointed. If you’re friendly enough, maybe your co-workers will like you more. If you keep the peace, maybe your family will stop judging your choices.

I know this because I’ve lived it. I spent years trying to be everything for everyone else, thinking that if I could just do enough, say the right things, and keep everyone happy, I’d finally feel good about myself.

But what happens instead? You work harder, bend further, and shrink yourself smaller, and still, someone is disappointed. Still, someone criticizes. Still, you’re left feeling like no matter how hard you try, it’s never enough.

It doesn’t have to be this way. This book is here to help you take your power back. To stop wasting your time, energy, and happiness trying to control things you can’t control—like other people’s opinions, moods, or actions—and, instead, focus on the one thing you can control: you.

And here’s the remarkable thing: When you stop managing everyone else, you’ll realize you have a lot more power than you thought—you’ve just unknowingly been giving it away.

Let me introduce you to the simplest, most life-changing idea I’ve ever discovered: the Let Them Theory.





What Is the Let Them Theory?


The Let Them Theory is about freedom. Two simple words—Let Them—will free you from the burden of trying to manage other people. When you stop obsessing over what other people think, say, or do, you finally have the energy to focus on your own life. You stop reacting and start living.

Instead of driving yourself crazy trying to manage or please other people, you’ll learn to Let Them.

So, what does this look like? Imagine you’re at work, and your colleague is in a bad mood. Instead of letting their negativity affect you, just say Let Them. Let them be grumpy. It’s not your problem. Focus on your work and how you feel.

Or maybe your dad makes another comment about your life choices, and it hits you like a brick. Instead of letting it ruin your day, just say Let Him. Let him have his opinions. They don’t change who you are or what you’ve accomplished or your right to make decisions that make you happy.

The truth is, other people hold no real power over you unless you give it to them.

Here’s why this works: When you stop trying to control things that aren’t yours to control, you stop wasting your energy. You reclaim your time, your peace of mind, and your focus. You realize that your happiness is tied to your actions, not someone else’s behavior, opinions, or mood.

It sounds simple—and it is. But I’m telling you, this shift will change everything. And, even though it’s called Let Them, this book is about YOU—your time and your energy—because these are the most precious resources you have.

The Let Them Theory will teach you that the more you let other people live their lives, the better your life gets. And, the more you let people be who they are, or feel what they feel, or think what they think, the better your relationships will be.

Learning how to let adults be adults has changed my life. And it will change yours too, because when you finally stop giving your power to other people, you’ll see how much power you truly have.

But perhaps the most surprising thing about the Let Them Theory is how I discovered it in the first place.

I’m almost embarrassed to tell you the story.

I discovered something that changed my entire approach to life at. . . a high school prom. (Now there’s a sentence I never thought I’d write).





The Prom That Changed My Life


I don’t know what it is about proms, but boy are they stressful. I went through four of them with our two daughters, so I figured our son Oakley’s would be a breeze. I was wrong.

Our daughters had obsessed about every detail for months: dresses, dates, promposals, hairstyles, spray tans, makeup, corsages, bus rentals, post-prom parties. It was never-ending, and I was so glad when their proms were finally over.

Our son, on the other hand, wasn’t sure he and his friends were even going to go. Despite my prodding, he communicated zero details or plans with us. (I know everyone with a son, a brother, or a boyfriend is nodding along with me right now.)

And then, of course, the week of the prom, Oakley decided he wanted to go. Everything was a last-minute scramble—the tuxedo, the specific sneakers he wanted to wear, the logistics. Even finding his date, something our daughters agonized over for months, was left for 48 hours before the big event.

When prom finally arrived, miraculously, we had the tux, the tennis shoes, the date, and the location of the pre-prom photos figured out. Somehow we had also been talked into hosting the post-prom party. Whew!

Right before we were racing out the door, my husband, Chris, fixed Oak’s bowtie one last time. Our daughter Kendall, who was home from college, looked at her brother and said, “You look SO good, Oakley.”

I stood there and took in the moment. What a handsome young man he had grown into. I couldn’t believe how fast 18 years had flown by. I also couldn’t believe that Kendall was almost done with college, and our daughter Sawyer had already graduated and was now working at a large technology firm in Boston.

As I stood there in the kitchen, I allowed this fact to wash over me: Time was passing, and I wished it would slow down. That’s the cruel fact about time. It’s going to keep passing, whether you slow down or not. The time that you have with the people that you love is like a melting ice cube.

One minute, it’s there. . . The next, it’s gone.

And here’s the sad truth: You and I, we can’t stop the ice cube from melting. The only thing we can do is make the most of the time that we have with the people that we love while we have it. In moments like this, when I really stop and pause, I always feel a little sad.

I don’t know about you, but I feel like I am racing through life and not allowing myself to truly enjoy it. And I get so worked up about things that don’t matter that I ruin the brief moments I have with those I love.

Did I really have to get so stressed out about the last-minute scramble and take it out on Oakley? No.

I’m sure you can relate, even if you don’t have a child going to the prom. Maybe you’ve let comments from your family ruin an entire holiday together, or been so consumed with work or school that you cancel yet another plan with your friends. You can waste years of your life being distracted by meaningless things or late nights at work. It’s easy to get yourself so stressed out about life that you forget the entire point is to live it.

As I stood there in the kitchen watching Chris fix Oakley’s bowtie, I just tried to take it all in. I took a deep breath, walked up to Oak, and gave him a hug. I looked at him and said, “You look so handsome.”

“Thanks, Mom.” And then he saw what time it was and said, “Dude, we gotta go!”

And just like that, the moment was gone, and time was moving again. Life is funny like that. One minute you are tearing up about the passing of time and how old the kids have gotten, the next minute you’re racing around trying to find your keys and getting annoyed that someone left their dishes in the sink, AGAIN.

On the way out the door, I opened the fridge and grabbed the beautiful corsage I had made from the local flower shop for Oakley’s date. He took one look at it and said, “Mom, she doesn’t want a corsage. DON’T bring that.”

I stared at him. “But it’s so beautiful,” I said. “Are you sure?”

“I already told you, she said she doesn’t want one.”

“Well, how about I just bring it with us, and if she wants to wear it she can. . . and if she doesn’t, she doesn’t have to?”

He snapped at me, “Mom, please. I don’t want you to bring it.”

I rolled my eyes at our daughter Kendall, looking for some backup. She shook her head at me and said, “Mom, drop it. He’s nervous. He doesn’t really know the girl he asked. Don’t push it.”

I’ll admit that I was annoyed and maybe even a little hurt. I had spent time scrolling online researching flower trends for prom, and I had ordered his date something really killer AND taken the time to drive down, get it, and pay for it. Here I was trying to do something nice for him, and instead of being grateful, he’s barking at me. Plus, it was his first prom—what did he know?

So I stuck the corsage in my purse, and we headed out the door to the place where everyone was taking pre-prom photos. Once we got there, Oakley introduced us to his date, who pulled out a boutonniere for his lapel and asked Chris if he could help her pin it in place. I, of course, couldn’t help myself.

I reached into my purse, pulled out that corsage like it was a winning lottery ticket, and said to her: “Oakley said you didn’t want something, but I had this made up for you just in case.”

Oakley shot me a look, and I immediately wished I had kept my mouth shut. He turned to his date apologetically. “You don’t have to wear it.”

She looked back and said, “It’s okay. . . I’ll wear it.”

And that’s when I noticed she had made her own corsage, which she was already wearing on one of her wrists. Kendall rolled her eyes. Chris shifted. If I could have evaporated in that moment, I would have. Oakley grabbed the plastic container from me and slid the corsage on the free wrist she had graciously extended. And then Chris pinned the boutonniere on Oakley’s tux. We took a couple of photos, and then, out of nowhere, it started to rain. And by rain, I mean. . . downpour. Rain hadn’t been in the forecast, so not one of the 20 kids dressed in black tie, or their parents, had a rain jacket OR an umbrella.

These kids are going to get SOAKED, I thought. But it didn’t seem to faze the kids at all. They just kept talking in a group, and that’s when I overheard them say, “So, what do you guys want to do for dinner?”

I leaned toward Oakley and whispered, “Oak, you guys don’t have a reservation for dinner before the prom?”

“Nope.”

I looked at my husband and said, “They don’t have a reservation for dinner?!”

He shook his head. “I guess not.”

This didn’t seem to bother my husband or my son. Boy, did it bother me. How the hell do 20 kids have no reservation or plans to eat before the prom? Our daughters had this handled months in advance.

Oak and his friends kept discussing their options as a group. I looked at them and said, “So what are you guys going to do for dinner?”

Oakley turned toward me and said, in that way that only a teenage boy can, “I think we’re going to head out and go to Amigos.”

Now, the Amigos Taqueria is this great little taco place in the center of town. . . but it’s got maybe four tables. The entire place is the size of a shed. All the moms froze, and even the dads were now questioning this plan. Twenty kids in black tie were planning to head out into this rainstorm with no umbrellas or rain jackets to a fast-food joint that maybe ten of them can squeeze inside of. . . before prom?! I couldn’t help myself.

You know that feeling when your body is two steps ahead of you, and you just can’t stop yourself from saying something or doing something irrational? In my defense, I wasn’t the only parent who intervened. Dozens of parents were now swarming their kids trying to take control of the situation. I broke out my phone and started searching for restaurants that might have a sit-down reservation available for twenty.

Nothing. . . There was nothing. I could feel Kendall watching me. She just stood there as I yelled out to the other parents, “I can’t find a reservation anywhere. I’ll look for a pizza place that delivers here.”

And that’s when she reached out and grabbed my arm, pulled me toward her, and looked me in the eyes.

“Mom, if Oakley and his friends want to go to a taco bar for pre-prom, LET THEM.”

“But it’s too small for all of them to fit in; they’re going to get soaked,” I said.

“Mom, LET THEM get soaked.”

“But his new sneakers are going to get ruined.”

“LET THEM get ruined.”

“Kendall, they’re brand new!”

“MOM! You’re being annoying. LET THEM show up to prom in wet tuxedos and dresses. LET THEM go eat where they want. It’s their prom. Not yours. Just drop it.”

LET. THEM.

The effect was immediate. Something inside of me softened. I could feel the tension disappearing, my mind stopped racing, and the stress of trying to control what was happening evaporated. Why did I need to get involved? Why did I have to manage this situation? Why not worry about what I was going to do for dinner tonight, rather than what they were? Why was I stressing about them at all?

Let. Them. It’s their prom, not yours. Stop controlling it or judging it, or managing it, and LET THEM.

So that’s what I did. As the other parents kept trying to micromanage their kids, I walked up to Oakley and smiled. “What now?” he said. “Here’s forty dollars for Amigos,” I told him. “Have an awesome prom.”

He smiled wide, gave me a huge hug, and said, “Thanks, Mom. We will.”

Then I watched as Oak and his date stepped out the door, into the pouring rain. I watched them run through the storm and splash mud up onto her gown and ruin his new sneakers. And I didn’t care. In fact, it was kind of cute.

Little did I know, that one moment would fundamentally change my entire approach to life.





Let Them . . . What an Amazing Idea


Within a week, I could not believe how different I felt. I started saying Let Them anytime I felt stressed, tense, or frustrated. . . and funny, I realized it was almost always regarding other people.

Let them be sold out of bagels at the bakery.

Let Oakley be mad that I’m not letting him stay out late tonight.

Let Grandma read the news out loud: “Did you hear about this. . .?”

Let them do construction during the Monday-morning commute.

Let them leave dishes in the sink.

Let the neighbor’s dog bark all day.

Let my family be late to absolutely everything we go to.

Let my relatives be judgmental of my career.

Let people hate the photo I just posted online.

Let my mother-in-law disagree with my parenting.

Two simple words: Let Them, changed everything. It was as if I didn’t care and was weirdly above it all. The things that used to bother me just. . . didn’t. The people who used to annoy me. . . just didn’t. The tight grip that I had on life started to loosen up. Situations at work that would stress me out or cause me to go home and complain to my family just rolled off my back. Brain space that was once overflowing with dumb worries, annoyances, and drama was now available for more important things.

The more I said Let Them the more I realized that a lot of what I worried about wasn’t worth my time, nor did it deserve my attention. And not everyone was worth my energy. It was liberating.

The more I said Let Them, the more time I had for myself. Time to think. Time to breathe. Time to have fun. Time to spend on what mattered to me. Time to take care of myself.

I felt at ease, happy, and centered. The impact was undeniable. Even Chris noticed: “You seem different.” And the fact is, I felt different. I felt so good, I just had to share Let Them online. So I posted a 60-second video explaining the Let Them Theory on social media. Here is what I said:

If your friends are not inviting you out to brunch this weekend, Let Them. If the person that you’re really attracted to is not interested in a commitment, Let Them. If your kids do not want to get up and go to that thing with you this week, Let Them. So much time and energy is wasted on forcing other people to match our expectations. And the truth is, if somebody else—a person you’re dating, a business partner, a family member—if they’re not showing up how you need them to show up, do not try to force them to change. Let Them be themselves because they are revealing who they are to you. Just Let Them and then you get to choose what you do next.



Within 24 hours, more than 15 million people had seen it. Within a week, 60 million, and there were tens of thousands of comments on the video. News outlets started writing articles about the theory and how effective it is. People around the world started flooding my DMs and inbox with questions, stories, and examples of how they were using it. Psychologists and therapists were writing blog posts about it.

I was so blown away by the immediate response, I recorded a podcast episode about the theory and my experience using it. That episode took on a life of its own. It was shared so many times Apple named it the sixth most shared podcast episode of the year, globally.

That was just the beginning, because then the Let Them tattoos started rolling in!



A lot of Let Them tattoos. . .





Let Them is by far the most powerful thing I’ve ever discovered. The fact that people around the world were getting Let Them permanently inked on their bodies is honestly what inspired me to write this book. I had to understand why these two words had such an immediate, profound, and universal impact on so many people.





Researching the Theory


I’ve spent the last two years researching the Let Them Theory: why it works, and how you can use it to transform your life and improve your relationships with other people.

In writing this book, I’ve spoken to many of the world’s leading experts in psychology, neuroscience, behavioral science, relationships, stress, and happiness. You’ll meet them as you read the book, and their research will help you apply the theory in countless situations in your life. As you’ll soon see, the science is clear: This thing works. And it works really well.

But this book isn’t just about introducing you to the Let Them Theory. It’s about a fundamental law of human nature: All human beings have a hardwired need for control.

We all have an innate desire to control everything about our lives: our time, our thoughts, our actions, our environment, our plans, our future, our decisions, and our surroundings. Feeling in control makes you feel comfortable and safe, so naturally you try to control everyone and everything around you—oftentimes, without even realizing it.

But the fact is, there is one thing you will never be able to control. No matter how hard you try, you will never be able to control or change another person. The only person you are in control of is you. Your thoughts, your actions, your feelings.

For too long you’ve been working against this fundamental law of human nature. You’ve been fighting to change people, battling to control situations, worrying about what people say, think, or do; and in doing so, you’ve created unnecessary stress, tension, and friction for yourself and in your relationships. I did too.

The Let Them Theory has transformed my entire approach to life and how I deal with other people. Instead of resisting the natural flow of human nature, I learned to embrace it. Instead of wasting my energy on something I can’t control—what others say, think, and do—I poured my energy into what I can control: me.

The result? I gained more control over my own life than I have ever had before. It was freeing. I stopped making other people the problem, and in doing so, my relationships improved in ways I never thought possible. It was like unlocking a door that had been sealed shut for years. And behind it? A life where I’m no longer weighed down by the need to manage other people.

In the coming pages, you’ll learn all about the theory, the easiest way to start using it, and how awesome it feels when you do. You’ll also learn about a surprising discovery I made early in our research. The Let Them Theory isn’t just. . . Let Them. Yes, it begins with these two words, but that’s not the whole story. Let Them is just the first half of the equation. There is a second, even more crucial step to this theory: Let Me.

In the next chapter, we’ll unpack both Let Them and Let Me and explore the science and psychology behind each one of the two steps. Then, you’ll learn about the eight core areas of your life where the theory will have the biggest positive impact. We’ll talk about your relationships, career, emotions, opinions, stress, love life, struggles, chronic comparison, friendship, and most importantly, your relationship with yourself.

Over and over, you’ll learn how you’ve been trying to control the wrong things and unknowingly made other people a problem. The truth is, other people should be one of the greatest sources of happiness, support, and love in your life. But they can’t be if you keep trying to control what they feel, say, and do. That ends with this book.

Master the Let Them Theory, and you’ll stop exhausting yourself trying to control the uncontrollable. This isn’t just about feeling better. It’s about redesigning how you live your entire life. I can’t wait for you to discover the space and freedom to experience your life the way you’ve always wanted—on your terms.

Let’s begin.





CHAPTER 2



Getting Started: Let Them + Let Me

Not too long after I discovered the Let Them Theory, I was sitting on my couch, scrolling through social media, when I saw a photo of an old friend of mine. She looked fantastic. I glanced down to read the caption, where she was describing an amazing weekend she’d just had with her friends. And I could tell she meant it.

As I stared at the photo, I admired how tan, happy, relaxed, and refreshed she looked. And I found myself thinking, Wow. I could really use a weekend like that. Hell, I could just use a spray tan. I started swiping through the carousel of photos and realized I was seeing photo after photo that showed an epic girls' weekend away.

Brunch. Dancing. Shopping. Laughter. Swimming. Cocktails.

Then I took my thumb and my pointer finger and pinched so I could zoom in for a closer look at the group shot, only to realize that I knew every single one of the women smiling back at me on my screen. My heart sank. My friends had all gone away together.

You know that awful feeling in your stomach, the one that hits you when you realize you’ve been left out. It’s like a punch. You try to brush it off, telling yourself it's not a big deal, but the hurt is real. I should have put my phone down, but I didn’t.

I looked through those photos one by one—seeing a girls' trip through the eyes of the very same women who I had raised my kids with in our small suburban town—I tried not to let it bother me. But it did.

My mind started filling in all the details. I imagined how much fun they were having and how close they had become. I had known these women for years. We bonded over barbecues, carpools, soccer games, date nights with our spouses, and hard conversations about parenthood. So, naturally, I started to spiral.

I’m talking: Full. Stalker. Mode. I sat there, on that same spot on the couch, and felt it meld to my back as I poured over each and every one of their accounts. Five minutes before, I had been perfectly fine. But now? Well now, I found myself feeling the familiar swirl of emotions take over: rejection, insecurity, confusion. When did they plan this? Why wasn’t I included? Why am I never invited anywhere? When was the last time I went away with friends?

As I kept on scrolling through their photos, turning those questions over and over in my head, Chris walked into the room, took one look at me, and asked, “What’s wrong?”

I sighed, and told him the truth: “I just found out a bunch of my girlfriends went away for the weekend on a really fun trip. I obviously wasn’t invited.”

“That sucks,” he said.

“Maybe I did something wrong,” I said. “Maybe they're mad at me.”

He crossed his arms and asked me, “Why do you care so much?”

I looked at him.

“It’s not like you’re close friends with them anymore, Mel.”

He was right. I knew he was. But I still felt this urge to reach out and smooth things over. I’m sure you’ve experienced this before. You find out that you weren’t included in something, and all you want is some kind of reassurance that there wasn’t something you had done wrong.

Because honestly I didn’t know. And if you are anything like me, when it happens you immediately assume that you have done something wrong. As I sat there on the couch wracking my brain for any evidence as to why I wasn’t included, I couldn’t think of anything. And that made me even more nervous.

I mean, sure, we had known each other for years. We had gone through early motherhood together, we had lived a lot of life together, and I really liked everyone who was on that trip. But, at the same time, I hadn’t really spent time with them as a group in a long, long time. I had seen them around town at large gatherings, but I hadn’t invested in those individual friendships; and I hadn’t planned anything fun or reached out to them recently either. Intellectually, I knew this, but emotionally I was devastated. I felt like I was back in middle school again: the one left out of the sleepover, the one who didn’t make the team, or who wasn’t part of the inside joke.





Putting the Theory into Practice


I felt myself wanting to reach out to them and fix it. Call, text. Anything to make the anxiety go away. That’s when those two words came in and saved me from myself. Let Them.

The old me would have obsessed over this for days. For weeks, really. My emotions would have gotten the best of me. I would have tried to pretend it didn’t bother me. I would have tried to convince myself that I didn’t care. I would have tried to rationalize it over and over in my mind. I would have turned my friends into villains to make me feel better. All of which would have made me feel worse and withdraw even more from these women who I genuinely liked.

But that didn’t happen. It bothered me for about 10 minutes. As soon as I said Let Them, I felt a little better. The second time I said it, I felt a little better. The third, fourth, fifth, sixteenth time, thirtieth time I said it. . . I felt a little better.

I will be honest with you: In these types of painful situations, you’re going to have to keep saying Let Them over and over, because when something hurts, the hurt doesn’t just disappear. It rises up again and again. So don’t be surprised when you find yourself having to repeat Let Them again and again.

Let Them go on the trip. Let Them take the weekend together. Let Them have their fun without you.

At first, those words felt like a rejection. Like I was giving in. But then I realized something important: Let Them wasn’t about giving in. It was about releasing myself from the control I never had in the first place. Because here’s the truth—no matter how much I tried to analyze the situation or how many ways I could try to control or fix it, nothing I did would change what had happened. Their choice to go away didn’t have to make me feel bad, but my attempts to control the situation were making me feel horrible.

Let Them.

And just like that, the knot in my chest began to loosen. The pressure to “fix” the situation faded, and I realized something that changed everything: Their weekend away had nothing to do with me.

It wasn’t personal. They weren’t plotting against me. They weren’t making a statement about my worth. And even if they were? Let Them.





What We’re Really Trying to Control


We all have moments where we try to control the world around us—especially when we feel hurt, left out, annoyed, or afraid. Maybe you’ve found yourself trying to manage every detail of a group plan to make sure everyone is included; or maybe you’ve stressed about whether people are upset with you when they don’t respond to your messages right away. It’s exhausting, isn’t it?

I’m a fixer by nature. I’ve spent most of my life believing that if I didn’t step in, if I didn’t manage the situation, things would fall apart. I had to be the one who kept everything together—relationships, work, friendships, even the emotions of the people I love. And when something didn’t go the way I expected, it felt like a reflection on me. If someone was upset, if something didn’t work out, if I wasn’t included, I automatically thought I had to fix it, change it, control it.

In talking to so many psychologists while researching this book, I learned that the urge to control things comes from a very primal place: fear. Fear of being excluded, of not being liked, of things falling apart if we’re not steering the ship. And it shows up in all kinds of ways. We hover over our kids, making sure they make the “right” decisions. We try to influence our partner’s habits, worrying that if we don’t step in, they’ll somehow get it wrong. We even impose our opinions on friends, believing we know better than they do about how their lives should unfold.

I’ve felt that fear a lot in my life. Fear that if I didn’t make things happen, I’d be forgotten. Fear that I wouldn’t be liked or accepted. Fear that without me at the helm, things would unravel. And let’s be real—control gives us the illusion of safety. When we’re in control, we believe we can protect ourselves from pain, disappointment, rejection.

But it’s just that—an illusion of safety. Because no matter how much we try to control people or situations, the truth is, we can’t. People will do what they want to do. They’ll make their own choices, live their own lives.

The fact is, none of that “control” actually makes you feel better. In fact, it has the opposite effect. Trying to control people and situations doesn’t calm your fears. It amplifies them. Any psychologist will tell you, the more you try to control something you can’t, the more anxious and stressed out you become.

Sitting on that couch, staring at my phone, I realized I wasn’t just trying to control what my friends might think of me—I was trying to control my own discomfort. I hated feeling rejected, so my immediate reaction was to fix the situation before I had to feel anything at all.

That’s when the Let Them Theory started to click at a much deeper level for me.





Let Them: A Tool to Implement Wisdom


The Let Them Theory isn’t just a mindset hack—it’s rooted in ancient philosophies and psychological concepts that have guided people for centuries. If you’re familiar with Stoicism, Buddhism, Detachment Theory, or Radical Acceptance, you’ll recognize that Let Them and Let Me applies these teachings and turns them into a practical, everyday tool for improving your relationships and reclaiming your personal power.

In Stoicism, the focus is on controlling your own thoughts and actions—not the thoughts or actions of others. This philosophy aligns perfectly with Let Them, which is about consciously allowing others to make their own choices and live their lives, without feeling the need to manage or influence their behavior. By practicing Let Them and LetMe, you’re applying the core principle of Stoicism: Focus on yourself, because that’s where your true power lies.

Buddhism and Radical Acceptance teach that suffering comes from resisting reality. The pain we feel often stems from wishing things were different than they are. The Let Them Theory helps you not only accept reality but also separate yourself from the need to change it. You acknowledge that others’ actions and choices are not yours to control, and in doing so, you reclaim your emotional freedom. This is Radical Acceptance in its most empowering form.

Detachment Theory teaches us how to emotionally distance ourselves from situations that trigger us. When you say Let Them, you’re practicing emotional detachment. You create a mental gap between your emotions and the situation at hand, allowing yourself to observe what’s happening without being consumed by it. The result? You remain calm, clearheaded, and in control of your actions.

To me, this theory is not the same as “letting it go.” Personally, I’ve never been able to let anything go—because it never feels resolved. It feels like you’ve walked away from something that’s bothering you, and just swallowed your feelings and moved on. Let Them is different. When you say Let Them, you’re not giving up or walking away. You’re freeing yourself. You’re releasing that grip you have on how things should go and allowing them to unfold the way they will go.

When you let others be who they are, you’re making an active, empowered choice to release control you never truly had. You’re freeing yourself from the endless cycle of stress, frustration, and emotional upheaval that comes with trying to manage everything and everyone. The beauty of Let Them and Let Me is that it helps you master these practices, so you can stop being ruled by emotions and start living a more peaceful, intentional life.





How This Works in Real Life


Think about how this applies to different areas of your life. Let’s say you’re in a meeting at work and you’ve come up with an idea you’re excited about. You’ve put thought into it, you know it has potential—but when you pitch it, the room goes quiet. People nod politely, but they move on, and before you know it, someone else’s idea is getting all the attention. You feel invisible. You start second-guessing yourself, wondering if maybe you should’ve said it differently or tried harder to be heard.

In that moment, you can either let this dismissal crush you, or you can pause and say Let Them. Let them dismiss it. Let them go with a different idea. Their response doesn’t change the value of your idea. It doesn’t change your worth as a contributor. They might have gone with a different strategy, but that doesn’t mean yours wasn’t a great idea. You’re still the same person with the same talents and ability to succeed, and the fact that you had an idea to pitch proves it!

The same goes for dating. Maybe you've been texting someone and things felt like they were going somewhere. But then, out of nowhere, they ghost you. No response, no explanation. It stings, doesn’t it? You wonder what you did wrong, replaying every conversation, trying to figure out where it went off the rails. The temptation to text them again, to find some way to get closure, is almost overwhelming. Been there.

But here’s where Let Them comes in. Let Them show you who they are. Their disrespect doesn’t say anything about you. How you respond does. Stop asking why they are doing this. The question is, why do you want to be with someone who does this to you? You don’t. Don’t waste your energy chasing someone who’s already left. Focus on what you can control: Processing your emotions and reminding yourself that you deserve someone who treats you with respect.

In both of these situations—whether it’s work, dating, or anything else—when you say Let Them, you are recognizing what’s in your control and what isn’t. Instead of spiraling, you’re choosing to steady yourself and detach. As I said earlier, other people hold no real power over you, unless you give them that power. And every time you say Let Them, you choose to take it back.

Or take me and the situation on my couch. I wasn’t even aware that my friends had gone away together. The second I saw the photos from their trip, though, I reacted. My emotions took over. I felt insecure. I felt left out. I felt less than. And then I took it a step further and told myself that I had done something wrong. Which only made me feel worse.

The truth is, I did this to MYSELF. My friends didn’t do anything TO me. They were just living their lives. They are allowed to go away. They are allowed to plan a weekend with whomever they want. The way I reacted to their trip is what hurt me.

This is so important to understand that I want to truly unpack this with you in detail. Let’s use the visual of a seesaw on a playground to explain how the power dynamic between you and other people goes up and down, and how to use the Let Them Theory when it happens.

When someone does something (like planning something and not including you) you will react in an either positive or negative way. If you react negatively—and have self-destructive thoughts or heavy emotions—it will weigh you down. Your reaction is what tips the scales and changes the dynamic between you and someone else.

This graphic illustrates exactly how I felt when I saw that photo online.





A) WITHOUT LET THEM




What caused me to go down? I did.

Anytime you internalize other people’s thoughts, actions, and feelings as evidence that somehow you’re a bad person or you’ve done something wrong, you just gave other people power. And it shifts the dynamic and balance in the relationship. You feel beneath them.

That’s exactly what happened when I told myself I had done something wrong. I felt inferior, jealous, insecure, left out, and less than. Those thoughts and emotions are really heavy thoughts.

When you say Let Them you free yourself from the weight of all the negativity that just made you sink. It’s like pushing off the ground on a seesaw. You go up and your friends on the other side go down. The power dynamic shifts.





B) SAYING LET THEM




It feels so good to rise above other people and the situations that bother you. That’s why people love saying Let Them, because when you’re up, you now feel this false sense of superiority and confidence. You push through those heavy emotions and rise up. This will automatically make you feel better than someone else. You will feel wiser and weirdly above it all, which is why it is easy to detach from the situation.

And a little superiority can go a long way when you're in an emotional spiral. That temporary feeling of power over other people can help you move through the situation, accept what’s happening, and process the frustrating or painful experiences in life.

It helps to feel better than the friend who doesn’t call you back, or the lazy roommate who doesn’t do their dishes, or the rude customer you have to deal with at work.

But then, that moment of Let Them is over.

Then you will think. . . now what? You’ll be sitting up there looking down on other people, and you’ll start to feel a little stranded in your superiority. And, after I initially started saying Let Them, I didn’t really know what to do either. Saying it and getting that jolt of superiority felt good, and detaching from the emotion felt great. That was the easy part. But I didn’t know what to do next.

And here is the danger of only saying Let Them: If all you ever do is say Let Them, Let Them, Let Them, it will lead you to feel more isolated. It will make you want to withdraw or shut down.

And that is exactly what the old me would have done with the situation on the couch. If I had just stopped at the Let Them part—I can imagine it now—I would have sat there in my superiority. I wouldn’t have reached out. I would have gossiped about them behind their backs, sought out reassurance from other friends, and felt very awkward every time I saw them. And these are women that I actually like and want to be friends with!

I want you to stop and really think about a situation where you see friends of yours going out and doing things without you. When it happens, it hurts. It always hurts to be excluded. You want to be included on that golf trip. You want to be invited over to watch the game. You want to go away for the weekend. You would love to go out for drinks with your cool co-workers. You want to have great, fun friendships.

And I want that for you too. So let me ask you a question: How exactly is feeling morally superior going to help you create those great friendships? It’s not.

Saying Let Them simply relieves you of the hurt and pain you feel. . . but only momentarily. It feels so good to blame other people and feel better than others.

But as your friend, I feel obligated to warn you that if all you do is say Let Them you’re going to find yourself without a lot of friends, without a lot of social plans, and confused as to why the theory “isn’t working” in your favor.

And that brings me to the major discovery that I made when I first started researching the theory. Let Them is just the first half of the equation. You cannot stop there. There is a second, critical part to the theory—Let Me.

The source of your power is not in managing other people; it’s in your response. When you say Let Me, you’re tapping into that power by taking responsibility for what you do, think, or say next. Let Me makes you realize that you are in control of what happens next and that life is more fun and fulfilling when you’re not sitting alone in your superiority.





Let Me Is the Power Move


That’s why the theory only works if you say both parts. When you say Let Them, you make a conscious decision not to allow other people’s behavior to bother you. When you say Let Me, you take responsibility for what YOU do next.

What I love about Let Me is that it immediately shows you what you can control. And there’s so much you can control: Your attitude. . . your behavior. . . your values, your needs, your desires, and what YOU want to do in response to what just happened.

It’s the opposite of judgment. Let Me is all about self-awareness, compassion, empowerment, and personal responsibility.

Your friends who went away aren’t better than you. And you aren’t better than them.

This is the crux of the Let Them Theory: Let Them and Let Me.

The more you allow people to live their lives, the better your life will get. The more control you give up, the more you gain.

The Let Them Theory is not about superiority at all. It’s about balance. It’s about making room for both you and someone else. It’s about giving other people the space and the grace to live their lives—and then giving yourself the same.





C) SAYING LET ME




For example, with my girls’ weekend spiral, first I said Let Them, which helped me rise above the situation and the hurt. It helped me separate myself from the emotions I was feeling. And that is the first step because getting emotional and blaming them or trashing myself, won’t magically improve my friendships.

The superiority gave me the mental space to really look at the situation from above. The more I said Let Them, the more space I had to consider MY role in this situation, and what I wanted to do about it.

And when I stopped to look in the mirror, I saw a lot.

I had been so busy working the past few years, I had barely seen my friends. I hadn’t invited anyone to do anything in a long time. Maybe I wasn’t excluded. Maybe they didn’t think of me at all. And if I’m not making an effort, reaching out, or bumping into them around the neighborhood, why would they think of me? Plus, if I’m being perfectly honest, I’ve been so busy with my own life, work, and kids, unless I saw my old friends post online, I didn’t think about them much either.

No one owes me an invite. No one owes me a call. Yes, these things feel good; and yes, you deserve friends who reach out. But whose responsibility is it to create those friendships? And more importantly, Let Me be honest with myself: Have I been doing my part? When I stopped to ask myself that question, the answer was no.

When you are an adult, your social life is your responsibility. If you want more fun, you should get your butt off the couch and create a great social life (talking to myself here too).

Let Me stop expecting other people to always include me. Let Me take responsibility for what I want in life. Let Me figure out the deeper issue that I need to look at. Let Me be more proactive about reaching out to people. Let Me invite people to do something this weekend. Let Me throw a party for once. Let Me develop better boundaries with work so I have time for friendship. Let Me prioritize my social life, because clearly it matters to me, and it is my responsibility to create one.

Let Me reach out to a few of these women to reconnect. Not in a passive way. Not to smooth things over. And not to get an invite to their next getaway. But because once I said Let Them and Let Me and rise above my emotion, I connect with the deeper truth that I actually really miss a few of these women, and seeing that post online made me realize that I work way too much and I want to make an effort to rekindle my friendship with them. . . and a few other people now that I am thinking about it.





Before We Dive in: Two Warnings


As I researched this book, two important questions came up repeatedly from people who were applying the Let Them Theory, and I want to address them now before we dive deeper into the rest of the book.





First: Does the Let Them Theory apply to children?


Yes, you can absolutely use the Let Them Theory with kids, (with some very important caveats), but this book is specifically focused on how you apply the theory with adults. Throughout the book, I make clear distinctions between adults and children to avoid any confusion. And for those looking for guidance on how to use this approach with children, teens, and young adults, I’ve included a special guide in the Appendix at the end of the book that breaks this down in detail.





Second: What if using Let Them makes you feel lonely?


This is a critical point. Some people have shared that they feel lonely after using the Let Them Theory. If you’re feeling this way, it’s a sign you’re applying the theory incorrectly. The Let Them Theory has two essential steps: Let Them and Let Me. These steps must go hand in hand. You cannot simply say Let Them and stop there. Many people forget the second step, Let Me—and this is a major mistake because Let Me is where your real power lies. It’s in Let Me that you take responsibility for your next move, for creating the life, relationships, and connection you want. Without this step, you’ll find yourself disconnected rather than empowered.

As your friend, I feel obligated to warn you that if all you do is say Let Them you’re going to find yourself without a lot of friends, without a lot of social plans, and confused as to why the theory “isn’t working” in your favor. It feels good to say Let Them because we like to blame other people. And as we’ve discussed, a jolt of superiority can help when you feel down. However, that’s not the purpose of the theory.

Let Them is not an excuse to stop answering your phone, to shrug your shoulders, to refuse to talk it out with a friend or family member who is hurt, to stay in a situation that hurts you, or to ignore discrimination or dangerous behavior. It’s not a license to give someone the silent treatment, ghost people, avoid hard conversations, or withdraw from your relationships.

It’s not supposed to leave you feeling alone and invisible, but rather more connected and more fulfilled in every single one of your relationships. If you find that you’re using the theory and it’s making you lonelier please hear this: You are using it wrong. The theory is here to make your life better, not worse. So I am reminding you to ALWAYS remember to say Let Me. Because that is the part that will change your life.

Using the Let Them Theory, I saw how often I blamed someone else for the fact that I was alone sitting on my couch. Or not making the money I wanted to make. Or how often I said yes due to guilt. Or the decisions I made because I didn’t want to disappoint someone else. Or how often I used the excuse of being too tired to make my health or fun a priority.

When you’re an adult, your life, happiness, health, healing, social life, friendships, boundaries, needs, and success are all your responsibility. If you’ve been secretly hoping someone else would come and rescue you, fix your problems, pay your bills, create a social life, heal your wounds, change into your dream partner, and motivate you to be your best. . . it’s not going to happen. No one is coming. And any time you spend blaming other people, or waiting for permission or an invitation, is wasted. Those days are over.

Your Let Me era is here.

You are capable of creating anything that you want if you are willing to put the time and energy into working for it. And that means you must stop wasting your time and energy on petty, shallow, and insignificant things. And it also means that you have to stop trying to control the one thing you can’t: other people.

In the next section of the book, we’re diving into four core areas of your life where the Let Them Theory will create the biggest and most immediate positive impact. You’ll learn how to stop allowing other people's behaviors, opinions, reactions, and success to affect your happiness and stand in the way of what you want. And there’s no faster way to get started and to feel the power of Let Them than using it to manage stress and protect your peace. So let’s jump in.





You and the

Let Them Theory



Managing Stress

Fearing Other People’s Opinions

Dealing with Someone Else’s Emotional Reactions

Overcoming Chronic Comparison





The more you let other people live their lives, the better your life gets.

— Mel Robbins





Managing Stress





CHAPTER 3



Shocker: Life Is Stressful

The fastest and most effective way to start using the Let Them Theory is to rise above the countless tiny stressors you face every day.

You know the ones I’m talking about: the never-ending notifications on your phone, the slow Internet connections, the unexpected changes in plans, the endless meetings at work, the inconsiderate behavior of other people, the long lines, the slow walkers. These small annoyances may seem insignificant, but they aren’t.

I get that people can be annoying, and, yes, you have a lot on your plate. Modern life can feel like death by a thousand cuts—one thing after another that slowly drains your energy and stresses you out. It’s not only easy to let it get to you, it’s dumb.

You can’t control how other adults behave, and stressing about it diminishes your power. You’ll never reach the full potential of your life if you continue to allow stupid things or rude people to drain your life force.

Your time and energy are your most valuable resources, and in the next few chapters, you’ll learn how to use the Let Them Theory to protect yourself from the unnecessary stress other people are currently causing in your life.

Just stop and ask yourself: Why do you have to let a long line at the coffee shop ruin your day? Why is traffic putting you in a bad mood? Why do you feel overwhelmed when someone interrupts you during an important task? Why does the person talking loudly on their phone in public irritate you? Why does a family member’s unsolicited advice feel like a personal attack? Why does someone else’s slow pace in a busy walkway make you feel rushed?

It happens to me too. Just the other day, I went to my favorite garden center to pick up some plants. There, the cashier was moving so slowly. There were only two lanes open and about five people waiting in each.

Beep. Beep. Beep.

I felt myself starting to get agitated. I had a meeting I had to get to back home. I wanted to turn to the person behind me, shake my head, and say, “Can you believe this?”

But I hesitated. I said Let Them to myself instead. The effect was immediate. I softened. Did it speed up the cashier? Nope.

It did something better. It protected me from this habit of letting little things become big stressors in my day-to-day life. The 10 extra minutes that this line was going to take wouldn’t negatively impact the rest of my day, but allowing myself to get agitated and annoyed about something I couldn’t control absolutely would. Why get stressed out about things beyond your control or that don’t really matter? How does something so small have such a large impact on you?

When you let the world around you impact your emotional state and peace of mind, you become a prisoner to these external forces. You’re letting trivial nonsense dictate your mood, drain your motivation, and steal your focus. There’s this famous quote about life from Greek philosopher Epictetus, “It’s not what happens to you, but how you react to it that matters.” What does that mean? It means that your personal power is in how you react.

Learning how to respond differently to the annoying and stressful situations every day will change your life. Right now, you’re giving away all your power because you’re wasting your time and energy on things that don’t matter; or you’re burning up over things that are beyond your control. You have no idea how big of a problem this is. I didn’t either.

The reason it’s hard to manage your stress is that your reaction to what is happening around you is automatic and you feel your entire body go on edge. It’s like you get swept up in the emotion, and the next thing you know, you send the text you regret. Or you say things in the heat of the moment that you don’t really mean. Or you stand there in a really long line of people, and the anger and annoyance just build and build even though you wish they wouldn’t.

These are all examples of how your reaction to stressful and irritating situations can become a big problem in your day-to-day life. You can’t control what is happening around you, but you can control how you respond to it. Nowhere is this more evident than at an airport. In fact, if you want to feel stressed, just go to one.





The Airport Stress Test


From the check-in to security lines to people losing their minds over weather delays, missing baggage, people crowding the gates before they even start the boarding process, tight connections, getting rerouted, all the overhead space taken by the time you board, long lines at the rental car counter. . . the number of things that could stress you out are endless.

But let’s use this fact as an example to help you understand what you can control and what you can’t control. Remember the fundamental law of human nature: You can’t control what other people say, think, or do. Anytime you try to, you lose your power. You must learn to focus on what you say, think, or do. That’s how you remain in control.

Because no matter what is happening on the plane or at the airport, you still hold the power.

A few months ago, I was on a plane and the guy right behind me was coughing as if it were his last day on earth. You know that deep, chest hack that is bound to get everyone around them sick?

I didn’t think anything of it for the first few minutes, but when it continued on and on, and then he started clearing his throat, and then he kept coughing, I started to get annoyed.

I was flying to an event where I had to give a speech, and over the next couple of weeks, I was speaking at a number of big events. I could not afford to get sick and lose my voice.

I turned around to look through the crack between the seats and saw him just open-mouth coughing into the air, as if no one else was on this plane. I thought: Is this guy really going to get me sick? It’s so selfish and rude of him. I can’t get sick. I considered my options.

Being passive-aggressive wasn’t going to solve anything. As much as I kept huffing and puffing in my seat and glaring at him between the cracks trying to make evil-eye contact, he was either not picking up on my clues or he didn’t care.

I considered flagging over the flight attendant and complaining, but he was sitting right there, so he’d hear me, which would feel really weird. So I decided to turn around like a mature adult and ask him politely, “Sir, could you please cover your mouth?”

There was an awkward pause.

He nodded and then he proceeded to cough openly for the rest of the plane ride. I know this, because I kept turning around and looking through the crack between the seats. Obviously, you feel bad for the guy. It’s not like he wants to be sick. When you have to cough, you have to cough.

But in the heat of the moment, I was getting more and more annoyed. I was not only stressed out, but it was now ruining my mood and making it impossible to try to get some work done.

This is just one example of how something happening around you can easily stress you out and negatively impact your body and hijack your brain.





Your Brain on Stress


One of the experts that I interviewed while researching this book is Dr. Aditi Neurukar, a physician at Harvard Medical School and author of The 5 Resets: Rewire Your Brain and Body for Less Stress and More Resilience. Dr. Aditi was the medical director of Harvard’s Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital’s integrative medicine program, where she developed an enormous clinical practice in stress management using evidence-based, integrative approaches to help her patients feel better.

Dr. Aditi says, “Stress is a much bigger problem in your life than you realize.”

According to Dr. Aditi, stress causes you to doubt yourself, procrastinate, burn out, doom scroll, and struggle with comparison. If you’re having trouble focusing, feeling happy, or taking care of yourself, the reason is stress.

She also told me that if your inner critic is louder than ever, you’re struggling with procrastination, you’re constantly tired, you can’t stop scrolling on your phone, or you have trouble disconnecting from work, it’s all due to stress. Dr. Aditi explained to me that stress is way bigger than just the tension you feel in your body. Stress is a physiological state in your brain. This is important to understand because stress actively hijacks the functioning of your brain. As Dr. Aditi explained it, normally your prefrontal cortex is in control.

This part of your brain helps you run your day-to-day life. It helps you plan, organize, remember things, and guide your decision-making. To become the best version of yourself, you need to leverage this part of your brain.

The problem is that the second you “feel stressed” by the guy coughing on the plane, the line that is taking too long, or the test results you are waiting on, your brain goes into a stress response and that prefrontal cortex that is so important is no longer in control (and neither are you).

Your stress response is located in another part of your brain called the amygdala. Dr. Aditi described the amygdala as a “small, almond-shaped structure deep in your brain, located between your ears. It’s one of the oldest structures of the human brain and many refer to it as our ‘reptilian brain.’ And it houses your stress response.”

If you’ve ever heard someone refer to the “fight, flight, or freeze response,” that’s the exact same thing as your “stress response”—meaning that when you are stressed, your amygdala is in control. This can cause rash decision-making and more impulsive behaviors.

When life is normal and you’re feeling good, your prefrontal cortex is the one driving most of your actions. This means that you can logically think through the pros and cons of situations and make well-thought-out decisions. In other words, you can choose how you are going to respond.

But, whenever something happens that makes you feel stressed, this is where you and I get in trouble because the response in our bodies and brains is automatic. Your amygdala takes over automatically. And, this part of your brain has one job: survival and self-preservation.

Your brain and body kick into fight or flight, and are only designed to work in this stressed-out state for short periods of time. You are supposed to reset back to normal functioning, where your prefrontal cortex is in control and you feel calm and confident again. But what happens when you don't reset?





The Real Reason You Are Exhausted All the Time


According to Dr. Aditi, 7 out of 10 people are currently living in a chronic state of stress. I used to be one of them. When you live in a state of chronic stress, you are locked in a constant state of fight or flight. Your amygdala is humming in the background, always on.

Dr. Aditi told me that when you’re stressed, you not only feel like you’re in survival mode, but from a neurological standpoint, your brain actually is in survival mode. Your goals. . . your dreams. . . your best self. . . your ability to be patient and nonreactive. . . it all goes right out the window.

Which is why you must solve this problem and stop allowing other people to create unnecessary stress in your life. There’s too much at stake. You deserve to live a good life, but you’ll never be able to if you are always in survival mode.

You’ll never get that project done this weekend if you keep procrastinating because of stress.

You need to have more fun, but you won’t allow yourself to have it if you can’t disconnect from work.

You should be more present and connected to your spouse, but you never will be if you’re constantly stressed.

The life you’ve always wanted is right in front of you, but you will never reach for it if your inner critic is constantly telling you not to. Stress is a major problem and it’s time you deal with it.





Hacking Your Stress Response


So I asked Dr. Aditi how we reset our brain back to normal functioning.

She said the first step is to understand what stress actually is so that you know you have power in these situations.

For me, it was a revelation to learn that stress is your body and brain switching between two functions. It’s empowering to know that I can switch back to normal functioning and that it’s not hard to do, using the Let Them Theory.

How cool is it that you don’t have to live your life feeling like everything happening around you has to stress you out? How amazing is it that other people’s behavior doesn’t have to be a huge problem in your life?

Next, you’re going to use the Let Them Theory to reset your stress response. Think of it as an on-off switch—a little lever you can pull inside your brain whenever something happens that stresses you out.

The moment you say Let Them, you are signaling to your brain that it’s okay: This isn’t worth stressing about. You are telling your amygdala to turn off. You are resetting that stress response by detaching from the negative emotion you feel.

Here’s how you do it: The moment anything happens that stresses you out, say Let Them. Put yourself in pause. Then say Let Me and take a breath.

Let Me take another breath. Slow your stress response. Calm your body and brain down. Take control and regain your power.

This seems so insignificant, but this one change will turn you into a different person. Catching your stress response using Let Them and Let Me empowers you to choose what you say, think, or do instead of allowing your emotions to hijack your response. No more rage texts, or snapping at your loved ones, or wasting hours crafting an email at work.

The fact is, not every email warrants a response and not every conversation needs your participation—and you do not always have to have the last word.

You’ll start to see that a lot of what used to set you off isn’t worth your time and energy; and the less you react to the things around you using Let Me, the more in control you feel.

Dr. Aditi said that taking deep breaths has been scientifically proven to help lower your stress response. Breathing in fully, feeling the air expand your belly, stimulates the vagus nerve, which sends a message directly to your brain that says, “We can calm down.”

By saying Let Me and resetting your stress response—you are now back in control and can choose how to intentionally respond.





Own Your Reactions, Take Your Power Back


On that note: Let’s go back to me on the plane, with the guy who is coughing behind me; I’m getting more and more stressed, and I can’t focus on the work I need to get done, and I feel like a caged animal sitting there strapped to my seat.

So, how do you use the Let Them Theory to get someone to stop coughing?

You don’t. You have to Let Them cough. Let Them.

I know. . . hear me out. Yes, it was stressing me out. Yes, I thought he was rude for not covering his mouth. And yes, I was worried about getting sick.

But let’s come back to control: What could I control in this situation? I couldn't control whether or not another person was coughing. I could only control how I responded to the coughing.

Focusing on what you can’t control makes you stressed. Focusing on what you can control makes you powerful. And that brings me to another important point: Who is responsible for me not getting sick?

Me, or this stranger on a plane?

Me. I’m responsible for my health. It’s not this guy’s responsibility to stop coughing because I want him to. It’s my responsibility to respond in a way that takes care of my needs. I know what you are thinking.

Shouldn’t everybody cover their mouth? Shouldn't everybody wash their hands? Shouldn't everybody follow basic guidelines of decency? Of course they should, but a lot of people don’t.

My point is, trying to manage someone else, or a situation that is beyond your control, is only going to cause you more stress. I could get mad. I could keep turning around. I could yell at the flight attendant. I could get frustrated and yell at the guy, but to what end? Isn’t there a more obvious and powerful solution right in front of my face?

I’m offering you a pragmatic and strategic approach to life.

Instead of getting enraged in my seat, I just Let Him cough, and then I Let Me focus on the simple actions I could take in order to protect myself.

I am going to cover my nose and mouth with my scarf, I thought. And I am going to put my headphones on to drown out the coughing. And that’s what I did. And with my scarf over my nose and mouth, I turned up my music in my headphones.

Problem solved.

Every time you say Let Them, you acknowledge that you cannot control this situation that is stressing you out. When you say Let Me, you are following Dr. Aditi’s advice and focusing on what you can control, which is your response to these stressful situations.

Dr. Aditi confirmed, “the Let Them Theory is like a sigh of relief for your stressed brain. It helps you reclaim control over your anxious thoughts so that your brain and body can finally get out of survival mode and back to thriving.”

Let Me explain why this matters. If you allow yourself to get completely stressed out, you are giving all your power to other people.

In the past, I would have allowed this guy to stress me out. I would have gotten zero work done, been exhausted by the time the plane landed, and then called my husband to complain about this idiot who ruined my entire flight. I probably would have told the story over dinner that night with the clients who had hired me to speak at the event. I would have gone on and on about how “infuriating” this situation was for me. All of which would have left me feeling even more stressed out, more worked up, and more drained.

I am explaining this in detail because I want you to see what a problem this is. When you let other people stress you out, you surrender your power to things that either don’t matter or are beyond your control. And it often spirals into other areas of your life for hours, weeks, and even years.

If you want to achieve your goals, be more present, feel more confident, and be happier, you must stop allowing other people to stress you out. In life, there will be things you can control, and things that you can’t. There will be situations that are fair, and situations that are not. You get to decide what stresses you out and for how long.

What Dr. Aditi’s research proves is that learning to protect your energy will improve your mood, mindset, health, focus, and ability to disconnect and unplug. I believe this is one of the reasons why so many people get the words Let Them tattooed on their body within days of learning about the theory.

It serves as a reminder that your peace is worth protecting. There is a certain kind of confidence that comes with knowing that other people can’t disrupt your peace.

But let’s take it up a notch.

A stranger coughing on a plane is a pretty straightforward situation. You will eventually get off the plane and move on with your life, so it is easy to use the Let Them Theory then.

But what about when it’s not clear what you should do or what the right response is? How do you use the theory when your stress is coming from something much bigger. . . like your job?





CHAPTER 4



Let Them Stress You Out

What about practicing Let Them and Let Me when it comes to something or someone that triggers your stress response every single day? According to research, work is the #1 cause of life stress for most people—and your manager has as much impact on your mental health as your spouse.

I’m sure I don’t need to tell you that because, as rewarding as work can be, it is filled with stress. From 4 p.m. meetings on a Friday, to dealing with rude customers, passive-aggressive emails, a micromanaging boss, doing work that you don’t enjoy, feeling unappreciated, seeing no opportunity for advancement, false promises, surprise layoffs, or being completely understaffed and having extra work on your plate—it’s always something.

And if you’re like me, and you’ve started your own business or are trying to be a good manager, just double that list.

So how do you use the Let Them Theory to not let work stress you out? For example, what if you’ve been doing a great job, hitting all your numbers, going above and beyond, and your boss just isn’t promoting you?

When you ask for an update, you get the stereotypical response that “the company’s profits are down this year” and “my hands are tied” but “you add so much value to this team” lip service. It sucks.

You feel frustrated, discouraged, powerless, hostile, or demoralized. Dr. Aditi says this is why she’s seeing burnout in record numbers right now: People are stuck in a state of chronic stress at work. And she added, your stress at work isn’t changing so you need to change your approach to dealing with it.

I know when I’ve been in that situation, that’s exactly how I felt. And the fact that you need your paycheck to pay your bills only makes you feel more stressed-out and powerless.

But as overwhelming as work may be right now, you are not powerless. So, how do you use the Let Them Theory to get your boss to give you the promotion you deserve?

You don’t. Let Them string you along.

I know it’s tough to hear, because it’s true. Yes, it’s not fair. Yes, you’ve earned the promotion. And yes, you deserve to be angry about it.

But Let Me ask you this question: Who is responsible for YOUR career? That’s right, you are.

Besides, you can’t control if your boss is going to promote you, give you a raise, or even move you to the cubicle that’s closer to the window. No matter how much hard work you’ve put in, or how many compliments you’ve received, the decision is up to them.

So if you’re in a situation where you’ve put in the effort, you have had the conversation, you’ve asked for the salary increase, you’ve hit your numbers, and you still are waiting for that promotion or title change or new desk and it’s just not coming, you have to stop being mad and choose what you’re going to do about it.

Because, guess what? If you let your emotions get the best of you, it’s going to make you crazy. If you let the stress of this situation take over, you will never be able to think strategically about your next move.

You cannot let the stress of this make you stupid. You’ve got to be smart about how you’re going to respond. Let Me. That’s where your power lies.

If something at work is out of your control and you’ve done everything you can to try to influence it, it is dumb to waste any more time trying to change the situation. And it is even dumber to constantly let it stress you out. You are way smarter than that. Your life and the possibilities in it are always way bigger than your current job.

You are never stuck. That’s a lie you tell yourself. You can leave a job, a relationship, a living situation, a date, an interview, or a conversation any time you want to.

But instead, you’re sitting there with your boss Steve, who you flip off every time the Zoom meeting ends.

You do not have to stay in any job that makes you feel frustrated, demoralized, or stressed. And you shouldn’t. Let Them string you along.

It’s time for the Let Me part. Stop fixating on your current situation, and start focusing on finding a better opportunity. Right now there’s an amazing job with a kickass boss, a better salary, and a desk next to a window waiting for you to come find it. Your company is not the only company on this planet, and there’s a million bosses out there who would be ecstatic to help advance your career.

Let Me go get it.

Is it hard to find a job? Yes. Can it take forever? Yes. Do you dread the idea of updating your resume? Yes. Is getting out there and networking intimidating? Yes. Your career is your responsibility and you have more power here than you think. It’s time to start acting like it.

Let Me choose to spend my weekends differently. Instead of blowing off steam at the bars with your friends and complaining about work, how about you pour your time and energy into doing the work to find a job you deserve? Yes, it may take you six months to land something amazing, but those six months are going to go by whether you do nothing, or you go after what you want.

And consider this: If you stay in that job, who controls your future? That’s right. Your boss Steve. But if you update your resume, start networking, and go on some interviews, who’s in control now? That’s right. YOU.

You can act like a toddler and call your boss every name in the book, but the harsh truth is that you’re the one to blame—because you are choosing to stay in a job that makes you miserable.

That’s on you. And you want to know what else is on you? Your dumb excuses for why you are not looking for another job. You have so much more power than you think. It’s time to start acting like it.





You Control Your Next Move


One topic that I want to address in greater detail is how you can determine what the right response is for you when you say Let Me. The Let Them part is obvious.

When you say Let Them, you stop trying to control what someone else is doing. When you say Let Me, you take responsibility for how you respond to it, which is not always obvious.

Every situation is different and learning how to choose what type of response is worth your time and energy, and what isn’t, will change your life. I have a story that will help you understand how to choose the right response for you.

The other day, I was taking our dogs for a walk at a popular spot at a local state park. As I pulled into the parking lot, a local park ranger stopped to pet my two dogs and say hello. And as we were chatting, he mentioned to make sure to keep the dogs on the leash and pick up their poop, because there had been a lot of complaints that dogs were running free, and that they were not being picked up after by their owners. And it was getting to the point where they may close the trails to dogs.

I thanked him for sharing that information, and assured him that I was not “one of those people” and would follow the rules. As I walked down the trail, there was a person walking 100 feet ahead of me, with their dog off the leash, running all over the place, and jumping up on people.

I started to get annoyed. I could feel the stress response rise up and my amygdala switch on. I was no longer enjoying my walk in the woods. I was focused like a laser on this dog and its owner, and I was getting more and more annoyed that this was exactly what the park ranger was talking about, and this one idiot was going to get us all banned from being here.

I kept saying Let Them, and it worked for the first five times I said it. But then her dog crouched right there on the middle of the trail and went number two, and I watched in horror as the owner kicks some leaves over it instead of picking it up in a doggy bag and removing it.

That was it. I went from feeling stressed to anointing myself as the dog police in five seconds flat. That brings me to an important aspect of using the theory. Your response to every situation is going to be unique and different every time.

There will be days when I just don’t have the energy to chase this woman down, hand her a doggie bag, ask her to pick it up, explain the implications of what’s going on, and request that she do her part.

And there will be days where I will run like an Olympic sprinter, chase her down, and do exactly that.

There will be moments when I just shrug my shoulders, say Let Them, and know it’s not worth my time and energy. And, when I get to the point where the dog has made its mess, I’ll Let Me be the bigger person, and I’ll take a baggie and pick it up. And then I’ll smear it all over her car in the parking lot (that last part was a joke).

While I don’t want to have to pick up after other people, I like being the kind of person who cares about leaving public spaces in good shape for everyone to enjoy them. I love knowing that I leave places better than I found them. And I love acting like a leader, even when it’s not my job to do so.

There will be other days where I feel that the best course of action is to turn around, walk back out to the parking lot, track down that park officer, wait with them until the woman comes back, and personally report her to the ranger so he can deal with her.

Every single one of these Let Me options are available to me and you. And as you were reading, you may even have thought of other options. The point here is, every situation is different, but one thing remains the same: You always get to choose how you respond.

I can’t stop that lady from letting her dog poop in the middle of the trail, but I can choose what I do in response to it. I get to choose who I am going to be and how I am going to show up, and that is a very powerful feeling.

Every situation will be different based on how you feel, what’s going on in your life right now, how much time you have, how important the issue is to you, what your values are, and what the most effective approach is.

Let Me is an opportunity for you to put your time, energy, and values at the center of your life. It’s where you get to choose what’s worth your attention and what isn’t. How do you decide what’s right for you? Particularly when it’s a really stressful situation? Great question.

I find it helpful in these stressful moments to just say Let Them, take a pause, and consider: Is this going to bother me in an hour? Is this going to bother me in a week? Or is this something that just bothers me right now?

If I’m still thinking about it an hour from now, I should do something. If it’s going to matter in a week or a year, then I definitely need to do something. In the situation with this lady and her dog, I knew it would bother me every single time I walked my dog at that state park.

In most cases, you will know what is right for you. And that leads me to the next example—which is the perfect topic to follow poop—and that’s politics.

According to recent research, the majority of people report feeling very stressed about the current state of world politics. I feel it too. And how can you not?

We live in a moment where we are more polarized than ever, the stakes feel so high, and everyone seems so far apart and either angry or scared about where things are (or both).

It’s impossible to have a civil conversation with most people who have a different point of view, because none of us really want to take the time to understand where the other person is coming from.

It would be easy, given how stressful politics can be at the local, state, national, and global level, to just throw your hands up in the air, disengage, and feel powerless to change the state of things.

So, how do you use the Let Them Theory to change the state of politics at a local, national, or global level?

You don’t. The school board has already decided. The Senate has voted. These are the two candidates running. The election is over. It’s tied up in the courts. Let Them. You can’t change what just happened.

But I never said you couldn’t change the future. Does it seem overwhelming? Yes. Does it feel like it won’t make a difference? Yes.

Do it anyway. Let Me stay engaged and vocal on the issues I care about and do something that can change the future of my local, national, and global politics. Don’t sit around and wait for someone else to clean up the mess that you see.

If it matters, be the one everyone else is waiting for. Create the change you want to see. That’s the power of Let Me.

I like to remind myself of what Professor Margaret Mead said: “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it’s the only thing that ever has.”

All it takes is one person to do the right thing. And if it bothers you enough, that person is you. Something can always be done. You can make a difference. And if it doesn’t matter enough for you to get involved, then stop complaining about it. It just stresses you out. And as you are learning, that’s dumb. Talk is cheap. If it really bothers you, dedicate some time and energy to changing it.

Over and over again, regardless of what situations and circumstances in which you find yourself using the Let Them Theory, you’ll learn that no matter how big the problem is or how stressful something feels, there’s always something you can do through your actions and your attitude to make it better.

That is the power of Let Me. You can’t control everyone around you, or the world at large, or what people are doing at the park, but you can always control what you say, think, or do in response—and that’s where true power comes.

And the more you tap into that power, the more you’ll see all of the ways in which you’ve been sabotaging your own happiness and giving all your power away. And, like me, you didn’t even know it. Your time and energy are paramount. The Let Them Theory really highlights this and empowers you to make better choices about what is worth your time and energy and what isn’t. This doesn’t mean avoiding difficult conversations or staying silent.

It doesn’t mean being a doormat and letting people walk all over you; nor does it mean you have to pick up everybody’s dog poop or run for political office.

What it does mean is that you get to choose what impacts you and to what extent. You get to choose what you participate in and what you don’t. You get to choose when a job or relationship or issue is worth fighting for, and when it’s time to leave. You get to choose, and that is why you are always in control of what happens next.

So let’s summarize what you have learned about managing stress. Right now, you allow other people to create unnecessary stress in your life. The Let Them Theory teaches you to protect your energy by not allowing minor irritations to control your life, so you can focus on what truly matters.

Problem: Other people are going to do things all day that bother you, annoy you, or stress you out. It will happen. You can’t control it. When you allow someone else’s behavior to stress you out, you give other people power. That leaves you drained with no time and energy for yourself.

Truth: Your body’s stress response is automatic. You will feel yourself getting annoyed. You will feel frustrated. You will feel the anger and agitation hit. You can’t control the emotions that rise up inside of you. But you can learn how to reset your stress response so your emotions don’t hijack you.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, you protect yourself from the stress other people have been causing you. Your power is in controlling your response to the other person’s behavior, to the annoying situation, and to the emotions that you feel.



When you say Let Them, you make a decision not to allow other peoplès behavior stress you out or bother you. When you say Let Me, you reset your stress response and take responsibility for how you respond.

It’s time to reclaim all your time and energy for what matters most to you.





Fearing Other

People’s Opinions





CHAPTER 5



Let Them Think Bad Thoughts about You

Poet Mary Oliver asked this question in her poem “The Summer Day”: “Tell me, what is it you plan to do with your one wild and precious life?”

I don’t know what your answer to Mary Oliver’s question is, but I do know this: Whatever it is that you plan to do, other people are going to have an opinion about it.

In the next few chapters, you’ll learn how to use the Let Them Theory to stop allowing other people’s opinions to hold you back from pursuing what you want and limiting the potential of your one wild and precious life.

You have no idea how big of a problem this is. Neither did I. It’s easy to put on a facade that you don’t care what other people think, but the reality is, we all do.

The truth is, people will have negative opinions about you and there is absolutely nothing you can do to change this fact. When you allow your fear of what other people think to stop you from doing what you want to do, you become a prisoner to other people's opinions.

This fear impacts every aspect of your life. It makes you procrastinate. It makes you doubt yourself. It paralyzes you with perfectionism. It’s the reason you overthink.

This is where that ends. It’s time to give people the freedom to think what they want. Let Them. It’s time to set yourself free and Let Me make the small moves boldly and unapologetically that over time will transform your entire life.

The Let Them Theory was a gigantic wake-up call for me. I knew that I was worried about other people’s opinions, but I had no idea how big of a problem it was until I started saying Let Them. Let Them judge. Let Them disapprove. Let Them have their opinions. Let Them think bad thoughts. Let Them talk about me behind my back.

Right now, you move through life with other people’s opinions as your road map. You take the left or right turn based on what you anticipate other people might think or say, rather than making the turn you want to make. When you navigate your life trying to predict what people are going to think and say about you, you give your power away.

Instead of overthinking every move you make, what if you just Let Them think whatever the heck they want to think? It’s life-changing to free yourself of this burden. Remember the fundamental law of human nature: You can’t control what another adult says, does, or thinks. Try to and you’ll regret it. The more you Let Them think what they want, the better your life gets.

What if you gave yourself permission to live your life, and you gave other people permission to think whatever they want about it? What if you pour your time and energy into your hobbies, your habits, your happiness?

What change would you make if you weren’t worried about being judged? What is something that you are afraid to admit that you want? What belief are you nervous to be more vocal about? What have you been too scared to try because you have never done it before? What challenge or race or adventure have you been secretly yearning to do? What do you wish would happen at work but you are too afraid to ask? What conversation have you been avoiding? What picture have you been waiting to post?

That last one really hits home for me.





Welcome to Your Biggest Roadblock in Life


Ten years ago, I was just getting started as a motivational speaker. I was brand-new to the speaking industry. And, like a lot of new businesses, in the beginning, there was no money. To get started and get my foot in the door, I would reach out to small women’s conferences and pitch myself to speak for free.

If you’re starting a business, or you’ve got a side hustle, or you’ve started trying to make money online through social media, you’re probably nodding your head, because in the very beginning, you’re putting in a lot of work with zero return.

I started getting frustrated that a year had gone by, and I was getting better onstage and the audiences were getting bigger, but my bank account was getting smaller. Why? Because I was working a full-time job during the week and doing these speaking gigs for free on the weekends.

And as I wrote about in the Introduction of this book, this was during the period of time when my husband and I were struggling with massive financial debt, so I was highly motivated to figure out how to make money doing this.

I asked some of the more experienced speakers for advice on how to start getting paid, which is what I recommend you do in whatever business, venture, or side hustle you dream of launching.

Every business has a formula. Follow it. I say that because one of the things I see people get hung up on all the time is this belief that “I need to be different.” That is a fancy way to say that you’re afraid other people will think that you copied them. This is an example of how your fear of what other people think holds you back from following the most obvious, easiest, and most proven path to success.

Let Them think you copied them. Because you did. And they copied the formula from someone else. Because they did. Formulas exist because they work time and time again. You will make it unique because you will be putting yourself into the formula. Do not reinvent the wheel. Follow the formula and use it to your advantage.

Which is exactly what the experienced speakers told me to do. Every successful speaker does the same three things. And, until you do these things, you’re not really in the speaking game.

Here is what they told me to do:

Build a simple website with photos of you on a stage, plus a description of your keynote and the main takeaways.

Get testimonials from a few event planners at past events you have spoken at and put them on the website.



And then most important:

Start posting about speaking online. Turn your social media into your marketing. Post photos from events. Post content related to your speech. Post photos with the event planners that hire you. Social media is how people find you. Social media demonstrates that you are a player in this industry. And social media is what will lead people to that one-page website so they can book you.



That is the formula. Follow it, and you will start getting paid. So, armed with that advice, I knew exactly what I needed to do. Plus, the stakes were really high. I needed the money to get my family out of debt. I was very clear about what I needed to do.

But did I follow the formula? Not really. Yes, I created a website. Yes, I asked for testimonials and put them on the website. But did I post on social media? Nope.

At the time, my social media was personal. It was filled with photos of my kids, pictures from family trips, and selfies with friends. All of my followers were friends, former classmates, and family members. I had never posted anything about my desire to become a motivational speaker or the fact that I had been doing it for free for over a year.

And if you’ve ever wanted to use social media to launch a business, or promote some new aspect of your life, or to share your art, you know how hard it is to look at your account that has only photos of your personal life and make the decision that you’re going to turn this into a marketing channel.

It took me TWO YEARS to start posting about my business on social media. Why?





Because I Was Afraid of What People Would Think


Who were you afraid of, Mel? My friends.

I worried that if I stopped posting photos of my kids and pictures from barbecues and get-togethers with extended family, and started posting photos of me speaking at conferences, that people would judge me.

Who does she think she is? Who the heck is hiring her to speak? What does she possibly have to say? What a phony.

I tried to post. But I’d thumb through my photos from the event and select one or two. Then the fear would kick in. As I drafted a caption, I would start to feel worried about other people’s negative opinions: Does this sound too arrogant? Is this caption professional enough? If I post this, will people unfollow me? Will my friends think I’m full of myself? Should I start a separate account from scratch?

I would then convince myself that it wasn’t worth it to post. You want to know why? Because I burned through so much energy trying to craft the perfect, most compelling, and marketable image and caption—something that would both promote me and ensure that no one would think a negative thought—that I exhausted myself.

I created hundreds of draft posts. And they just sat there, in my drafts. . . for years. And when I did get the jolt of confidence to post, I would leave it up for five minutes and check it obsessively; and if there weren’t as many likes as I wanted, or the comments weren’t as positive as I had hoped, I would delete it.

This stupid fear kept me from marketing my business, something I wanted to make my full-time career, for years. I gave other people’s opinions more weight and importance than my own ability to get ahead in life. Talk about giving your power away.

And when I look back at it now, it makes me sad.

I stopped myself from taking the actions that would have helped me achieve my goals, make more money, get out of debt, be able to buy nice things for my kids, and get a lot more clients a lot faster. Isn’t that stupid? Of course it’s stupid. And yet I’m sure you struggle with the same fear when it comes to “putting yourself out there.”

Whether it’s your business, your art, your music, your videos, or posting a photo of you in a bathing suit, if you’re censoring yourself it’s because you fear people’s opinions. That’s why you cover up your acne and insist on standing “on your good side” in every photo. And this is the same reason why you don’t speak up at meetings. Online you are afraid to look bad and at work you are afraid to sound bad. You’re afraid of what other people will think if they see the real you.

Every time you edit what you post, or stay silent in class or at work, or hide in the back of the group photo, you are engaging in self-rejection. You’re the one telling yourself that you’re not good enough. The constant questioning, editing, deleting, overthinking, and asking other people, “Does this look good?” only magnifies your self-doubt. And you want to know the crazy part? You’re doing it to yourself. I did too.

Most advice on this topic sucks. Most people tell you to just “stop caring” about what other people think. But no one tells you how. It’s time for a new approach. Using the Let Them Theory, you’ll adopt a revolutionary approach to squashing this fear once and for all: Give people the freedom to think negative thoughts about you.

It is a radically beautiful idea that will unlock your confidence, free your self-expression, and catapult you into a whole new chapter of your life. Give people the freedom to think something negative about you.

Let Them. It not only works. It’s science.





You Have Zero Control over Someone Else’s Opinion of You


The fact is, it is impossible to control someone else’s thoughts. Therefore, fearing what other people think, or trying to control their thoughts, is a complete waste of your time.

You will never feel in control of your life, your feelings, your thoughts, or your actions until you stop being consumed with or trying to control what other people think about you.

I will say it again: Adults will have negative opinions about you—no matter what you do. Why? Because adults are allowed to think whatever they want.

It is physically and neurologically impossible for you to control what someone else thinks. The average human being has about 70,000 thoughts a day. Most of which are random and cannot be controlled. Which is why it’s ludicrous to waste any of your energy worrying about what other people think or trying to change what they think.

You can’t even control half the thoughts that pop into your own mind. Why the heck do you think you can control what pops up in someone else’s? You can’t. It is scientifically impossible. That’s why the Let Them Theory is so revolutionary.

Instead of fearing other people’s opinions, you are just going to allow them to think what they want. In fact, I recommend that you assume people will think negative thoughts about you. Because people do have negative thoughts about you.

This is normal.

And by the way, people who love you think bad thoughts about you. . . every day! I have bad thoughts about the people I love every day! This is normal. To prove it, I’ll go first.

When my husband wakes up, he usually lets out a huge fart. My first thought is, You are disgusting. I love Chris more than any human being on the planet. But I have bad thoughts and negative opinions about him all the time.

Same thing with my dog. At 5 p.m. my dog, Homie, is so annoying because he knows it’s dinnertime. He follows me around, he pants like crazy, he jumps up on me, and you know what I think: He is a giant pain in the rear end, and he needs to chill. But I still love him.

My oldest daughter, Sawyer, who I wrote this book with, is a complete control freak; and when things aren’t just right, she gets overbearing and too intense. She goes into an OCD cleaning spiral that just stresses everyone else out. But I still love her.

Every time our middle daughter, Kendall, FaceTimes me from Los Angeles, it feels like she is wearing a new outfit. I think she is irresponsible with her money and the last thing she needs is more clothes. But I still love her.

And our son, Oakley, is literally perfect. Just kidding. For the first hour he is awake, he refuses to make eye contact and speak to people. I think he is rude. But I still love him.

By the way, I asked my children to describe some adjectives they think about me. They said: messy, disorganized, loud, overfriendly, all-over-the-place, controlling, always late, know-it-all—and they have a lot of opinions about how much I share online about our life. And yet, they still love me. (Sawyer also wanted you to know that writing this book with me nearly drove her to sever parental rights because of the number of times I completely blew up the manuscript—for context this is version 11.0.)

Why am I telling you this? Because everybody has critical opinions about people they love as well as total strangers. It is a fact of life.

Embrace it and accept it. Instead of trying to change reality, start using it to your advantage. Let Them.

Here’s another truth: Just because someone has a negative opinion doesn’t mean they feel negatively about you as a whole.

I can think a bad thought about my husband and still love him and treat him with so much respect and kindness, because two things can be true at once. You can be annoyed by the way someone is acting and still love them to death.

This is how you feel about the people you love! You think their friends are bad influences. You think they are overreacting. You think their boyfriend treats them poorly. You think their business idea is going to fail. You think they are self-centered. But you still love them.

My point is simple: Adults will have negative opinions about you and everything you do. Let Them judge. Let Them react. Let Them doubt you. Let Them question the decisions you are making. Let Them be wrong about you. Let Them roll their eyes when you start posting videos online or you want to rewrite the manuscript for the 12th time.

Instead of wasting your time worrying about them, start living your life in a way that makes you proud of yourself. Let Me do what I want to do with my one wild and precious life.

This approach is liberating because right now you are living your life and making decisions trying to anticipate what everyone is going to think. When you let the fear of what people might think dictate your choices, you limit your potential and hold yourself back from pursuing what you truly want.

It’s the reason you procrastinate, doubt yourself, get paralyzed by perfectionism, and, most importantly, it’s why you wake up every day and avoid the work that would actually help you get ahead.

You are so afraid of judgment, you don’t take any risks at all. Isn’t that what you are afraid of? That you’ll be judged?

That, if you get divorced, or quit the real estate business, or go back to school, or cut your hair, or try out for the soccer team and get cut, everyone will have an opinion about it? Of course they are going to have an opinion about it. So what?

This stupid fear is stopping you from trying new things, taking risks, being yourself, and making the small moves that, over time, will change your life. How sad.

The Let Them Theory will help you be more courageous. Doesn’t it seem smarter to accept reality and give people the freedom to judge?

You can’t control what someone thinks, so there’s no reason why you should be afraid of it—or allow it to stop you anymore. Your time is way more valuable than that, because you’ve got important things to do with this one wild and precious life.

Starting today, you are going to grant people the freedom to think negative thoughts about you. Let Them.





“But I Don’t Want People to Think Negative Thoughts About Me.”


I know what you are thinking: But I don’t want people to think negative thoughts about me, Mel. I know you don’t. Neither did I. But the fear of what other people may think is a major source of your self-doubt.

I’m not good enough. (For whom?)

I’m not smart enough. (For whom?)

They are going to be mad at me. (Who is going to be mad?)

My parents won’t approve. (So?)

If I do this, no one is going to like me. (Who is no one?)

What will my friends think? (Whatever they want.)

Does this make me look bad? (To whom?)

Every one of these common fears is all tied to other people. That’s why I’m repeating this fact over and over again: Adults will have negative opinions about you, and your outfit, and what you just said, and what you did last week, and what you want to do.

Let Them.

Adults are allowed to think whatever they want to think. So are you. This is why the Let Them Theory will set you free. Instead of living your life on the defense, you’re going to get on the offense. You’re going to play the game of life the way you want.

Here’s another truth: You are so much stronger than anyone’s opinions about you. Stop giving your power to other people and step into your potential.

Let Me live my life in a way that makes me proud. Let Me make decisions that align with my values. Let Me take risks because I want to. Let Me follow the path my soul is turning me toward.

Doing what makes you happy, being brave, taking risks, and following your own path will always be more important than other people’s opinions about it. This is YOUR life. Stop letting other people’s opinions ruin it.

Write the book. Ask them out. Wear what you want to wear. Go surf all day. Go back to school. Drop out of school. Move. Get a dog. Book the trip. Stop drinking. Embrace your sexuality. Take the path that you’ve been scared to follow.

The more you use the Let Them Theory, the more you’ll realize that, underneath this fear, your soul has been nudging you all along in the direction that is meant for you.

Every time you say Let Them, you clear all of the noise and distraction on the surface and create space for something deeper: your voice, your intuition, your truth, and your unique path in life.

It’s always been there. It’s just been buried beneath all this fear.

As you use the Let Them Theory to free yourself of the burden of other people’s opinions, you’ll begin moving through life with your values, your needs, and your goals as your road map. Instead of anticipating what other people might think, you’ll navigate your life in a way that makes you proud of yourself.

And that right there is the secret. When YOU are proud of yourself, you hold all the power.





Make Decisions That Make YOU Proud


This brings me to a very important point about prioritizing your needs while also maintaining supportive and loving relationships. The point here is not to move through life as a selfish or narcissistic person who doesn’t care about other people.

The point is learning how to put your needs first as you’re balancing what works for you with the expectations and feelings of other people. In life, you don’t want to be a doormat, but you also don’t want to be an inconsiderate bulldozer. It’s a balance.

Let’s say you have a crazy-busy weekend coming up. On one hand, you have a close friend celebrating a big milestone birthday—and it’s one of those really fun weekends where friends are all getting together to celebrate.

For you it means making a four-hour drive to get to where the party is going to be held. And you know that the right decision for you is to be there. On the other hand, you promised your parents months ago that you would come home this same weekend because your grandparents are visiting.

You want to do both.

You want to be a good friend, you want to be a good child, and you want to be a good grandkid, so you move heaven and earth to drive four hours north of the city to be present for the Friday night festivities for your friend.

And you are glad you did.

You stay up late, laughing with friends, and down a bottle of wine. You have an absolute blast. Then, the next morning you wake up at 7 a.m. You roll out of bed, pull on your sweats, leave a note saying you’re sorry to miss out on the rest of the weekend, and get back in the car to drive another four hours to your parents’ house to spend the rest of the weekend with your grandparents.

As you are driving on the road, you are proud of yourself for making the effort.

Little do you know (you’ll find out later), the birthday girl was upset that you left and apparently said: “I don’t know why she even bothered coming if she could only stay one night.”

Let Her.

Four hours later, you’re at your parents’—a little hungover and a lot tired. You step out of the car in your sweats and hug your grandma who is so excited, she is teary-eyed.

Then you hug your mom, and she whispers in your ear, “Your grandmother was so disappointed you weren’t here when she arrived last night.” And then she adds, “We need to leave for lunch in ten minutes. You need to change.”

Let Her.

I am telling you this story to prove two points: First, even when you bend over backward and try to please everyone, and make it work, even THAT won’t guarantee that other people will think a positive thought. Let Them.

Second—and this is the most important point—don’t be the person who bends over backward to make everyone happy. I used to be that person. It left me depleted and feeling like nothing I could do was ever good enough.

Now that I know the Let Them Theory, I bend over backward to make myself happy. Let me explain.

The reason to make a herculean effort, or to show up both at your friend’s birthday party and to see your grandparents, is that it makes YOU proud of yourself. Don’t go to your friend’s birthday so they think you are a good friend. Go to your friend’s birthday because it makes YOU feel like a good friend.

Don’t go home to see your grandparents because it makes your mother happy. Go home to see your grandparents because it makes YOU happy to prioritize your grandparents and family.

When you operate in a way that makes you proud of yourself, it doesn’t matter what other people think. They’re going to be mad that you left early. They’re going to be mad that you arrived late. Someone is always going to be disappointed by the decisions that you make. Don’t ever let it be you that’s disappointed. And don’t let guilt drive your decisions.

When you go to your parents because you feel “guilty,” you’ve turned your parents into the villain. When you choose to go because you’d be mad at yourself if you didn’t, you’re in control of your decisions.

This is a very straightforward example of how to stop worrying about what other people think, and let your values drive your decisions.

But what about those moments when your opinion and someone else’s really do clash? Like what if your mom doesn’t like the person you are going to marry? What do you do then?

I’ve been there.





CHAPTER 6



How to Love Difficult People

In my opinion, it’s easier to use the Let Them Theory with strangers, co-workers, and even friends, because you will likely have a little distance from them to recharge after using it. You can walk into your bedroom and shut the door. You can go home after work. You can walk off the plane.

And most of the time, you won’t even know about it when someone is thinking something negative about you. Family, though? Family hits different. Family is with you for life.

Your family tends to be a lot more blunt and in your face with their opinions: They are mad that you aren’t coming home for the holidays. They constantly question why you are still single. They think you’ve ruined your life by dropping out of school. They hate your friend group. They disagree with how you are living your life. They make it clear they don’t like who you’re dating. They don’t want you to quit your job to start that business. They wish you would take better care of yourself and they are very vocal about it.

Family tends to be a lot harsher to your face because they have a stake in your happiness and your success. A lot of the time when your family cares, they show it by pushing you. When they don’t like your friends, or they think you’re headed down the wrong path, or they wish that you would take better care of yourself, they let you know it.

Most of the time, it’s how your family shows you that they care. They want more for you, they want you to be happy and they see all your potential when it’s going to waste. However, it can very easily cross the line from caring to control.

Family has had opinions about you since you were born. They have known you the longest. They feel entitled to their opinions because they think they know what’s best for you. (Which is typically also what feels best for them.)

Plus, everyone in your family has expectations about each other and the way the family should operate. These familial relationships cut deeper than the rest because you have known them for a long time—and these relationships form an interconnected system. Which also explains why your family tends to react more dramatically to any change you make—because you are part of that family system. Any change you make will send either positive or negative waves through the entire system.

Knowing that people will have a reaction because you’re part of an interlocked web of relationships that has been in place for generations can help you navigate this better.

I’m not saying that those expectations or that system is right. I’m just saying that it’s the reality. And I find understanding the larger context of any situation helps me stay in control of how I show up in my family.

For example, if you decide to get a divorce from your spouse, or you no longer want to follow the same traditions, or you marry someone outside your religion, or you pursue a unique career path, or you have different political beliefs, this will send shock waves through the entire family system because it disrupts everybody’s expectations and beliefs about who you are and how you should live your life.

Nowhere is this more apparent than when the dynamics of stepchildren and stepparents get added to the interlocked web. This is a major shock to the family system and can either make or break it, for better or for worse. All expectations for how the household runs when new individuals are introduced are thrown out the window. Change can be really hard to accept. Especially for the kids who are being forced to just accept this change and operate as one big happy blended family.

The Let Them Theory will be a game-changer in helping you navigate your role as a stepparent. As the adult, it’s your responsibility to Let Them grieve. Let Them see you (and your kids) as a threat, because no matter how good your intentions are, you are a threat. They have to compete with you for time with the parent. It’s true. They are seeking control, just like you are. Let Them feel their emotions. Let Them have time alone with their parent. If they don’t have to like you. Let Them.

Don’t ever forget that stepchildren, in particular, need understanding, grace, and compassion from you. They aren’t just learning to accept a new adult in their life; they are also grieving the loss of the family they wanted. This is NORMAL.

Understanding the larger context, will help you focus on the Let Me part and operate with more grace and be the wise and compassionate adult. The more grace and kindness you display, the more space you create for a change in the dynamic to happen.

These dynamics between stepchildren and stepparents are hard. There is nothing seamless about them. But they also have the potential to be a lot more beautiful with the help of the Let Them Theory and a specific tool you’re about to learn in this chapter.

I once heard a therapist say at a conference, “If it weren’t for families, I wouldn’t have a business.” When it comes to family, your relatives are entitled to their opinions, but that’s different from them rejecting your right to live your life, be your own person, and love who you choose to love. Whether their opinions are right or not is not the point. It’s how you relate to their opinions that matters.

So, what happens when your loved ones don’t agree with the way you are living your life or who you are as a person? I can relate. Here’s what you are going to do about it. Let Them.

Don’t try to change their opinion. Give them the freedom to have it. Whether it’s your stepkids, your sister-in-law, your grandmother, or your brother, they are allowed to think whatever they want. And they are even allowed not to like you or the person you love. So, Let Them. And then, Let Me choose how to respond.





Frame of Reference


My friend Lisa Bilyeu, who is a bestselling author, host of Women of Impact podcast, and co-founder of the billion-dollar nutrition company Quest Nutrition, shared the concept of Frame of Reference with me.

It is a tool to help you deal with situations where someone disapproves of who you are, who you love, what you believe, or how you are living your life, and you want to navigate this at a deeper level.

I’ve been there and maybe you have too.

Our global podcast audience went crazy over Frame of Reference when Lisa described it as a mindset tool that’s helped her relationships. Frame of Reference is a fancy way to say “understanding the lens through which somebody sees something” and it works beautifully with the Let Them Theory.

I’ll give you an example from my life. When I met my husband, Chris, I was ecstatic and madly in love. And when he proposed I was absolutely over the moon. At the time, I remember my mom not seeming as excited as I expected her to be.

So I had this conversation with her where I told her I wanted her to be excited for me, and I asked her to act as though she was the one who chose him for me.

And she said, “But I didn’t choose him for you, and if it were up to me, I wouldn’t have, so I am not going to act like I did.”

At the time, I was so angry I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t want to cut her out of my life, but I had no idea how to handle the situation. Here I am madly in love with someone I know is my soulmate, and my mom tells me to my face, “I would never have picked him for you,” and then refuses to act excited for me.

I went on to marry Chris, but I felt this tension of disapproval underneath the dynamic between me and my mom for years. It was hard for me to forget what she said. And I didn’t know how to let it go.

Over time, the tension dissipated, and 30 years later, my mother adores Chris. She likes to joke, “Chris, you’re my favorite son-in-law” (he’s also her only son-in-law).

So how did I navigate this? It’s only recently using the Let Them Theory and this tool, Frame of Reference, that I have really understood why she felt the way she did. It has been a real game-changer in my relationship with my mom and my ability to hold space for her when I disagree with her opinion.

See, if I stand in my mother’s shoes, knowing what I know about her life, I wouldn’t want me to marry Chris either. Why? Because Chris is from the East Coast and marrying him meant that I would probably settle in the East and never move back home to the Midwest or live near my mom and dad ever again.

Because my mother’s Frame of Reference is that once she left home and met my father, she never moved back home again either. My mom left the family farm she grew up on in upstate New York when she was 17 to attend college in Kansas. She met my dad there, and they fell in love. By the time she was 19, she was married and had me.

It’s not what she or my dad had planned, but it’s what happened. In fact, when my dad’s parents found out that my mom was pregnant with me, my grandmother said to my 19-year-old mother, “I hope you didn’t just ruin our son’s life.”

Can you imagine? When I think about how young my parents were and the fact that they were living in Kansas and had no family around them, it makes me so sad.

This was my mom’s lived experience, and it formed her Frame of Reference about raising a family so far away from parents, and how hard it is to have no support from family around you.

My mom and dad ultimately settled in Michigan after my dad finished his residency and medical school, and growing up I rarely saw my grandparents or extended family because they lived so far away. It was just me, my mom, my dad, and my brother. Our own little family of four against the world.

So when I left home to go to college on the East Coast, it must have triggered this whole fear that I might never come back home. And when I met Chris in New York, who was also from the East Coast, it solidified my mom’s biggest fear that I too would start my life far away and never move back home to my small Midwestern town.

And that’s exactly what happened. My mom’s biggest fear came true. When you look at it from my mother’s Frame of Reference, she saw her story playing out in front of her, all over again. I was going to move away and meet somebody and never come home.

And she was right. I’m sure she wanted me to marry someone from Michigan so I would settle down close to them. Thirty years ago when I met Chris, I didn’t think about my mom’s Frame of Reference. I was just offended and angry and concluded that she “didn’t support me.”

I can now see that she supported me—she was just scared of losing her daughter. She loves me and didn’t want me to live so far away. Using the Let Them Theory, I can give her the freedom to wish my life took a different path, and I can also really deeply understand where she is coming from.

I can also empathize with how hard it must be to see your daughter marry someone who will take her away from you. I wouldn’t choose somebody like that for my daughters and son either.

I wouldn’t want my daughter Sawyer marrying somebody from Europe and going to live in Paris. I mean if it makes her happy, she should. But would that be my choice? No. This may seem unsupportive or controlling, but I’m sure every parent can relate. And I’m not saying that to be controlling. I’m saying that because that’s how I feel. My opinion may be negative, but I am allowed to have it. Which I am sure my daughter would feel is very unsupportive.

And the same thing with my daughter Kendall. She currently lives in LA, and she could very well meet somebody that lives in California and proceed to settle down and raise her family out there. That would mean that I wouldn’t see her or her kids as much as I would if they were living here on the East Coast.

And I’m allowed to have that opinion, just like Sawyer is allowed to move to Paris and Kendall is allowed to decide to raise a family in LA.

My mom is also allowed to have the opinion that she wouldn’t have chosen someone from the East Coast for me. I’m glad it didn’t stop me from marrying Chris, and living and raising a family where we wanted to be.

But now I am grateful for the Let Them Theory because I also deeply understand my mom, and why she felt reluctant 30 years ago. It wasn’t judgment; it was grief. She wasn’t wrong. She was right. But I wasn’t wrong either.

In fact, we were both right. Because we have different Frames of Reference.

Seeing it through her lens helps me put our relationship back in balance. There was no longer a power struggle; there was understanding.

One reason why it’s so challenging to navigate these types of situations is because you both believe you are right. From their lived experience, or Frame of Reference, they believe their opinion is right. From your lived experience, or Frame of Reference, you know your opinion is right.

With the Let Them Theory, there is space, with acceptance and understanding, for both of our opinions to be true. There is space for a deeper connection, honesty, and love.

It takes an extraordinarily mature person to be able to detach from your emotions and want to step into someone else’s shoes. It’s hard to understand that someone can love you and have opinions that are deeply hurtful and at times bigoted.

When this happens in life, how you choose to respond is a deeply personal choice. I can’t tell you what you should do if someone in your family is judging you. What I can do is give you the tools to determine how you want to respond to the situation.

Do you want this person in your life? If you do, the Let Them Theory will create the space for it. What I’ve found in my own experience and in researching this book and hearing about the experiences of so many other people, is that when you give people the space to come to their own conclusions—and you focus on showing up as your full self in a loving and compassionate way—over time, people often change their opinions on their own.

So, as hard as it may sound, Let Them have their opinions and focus on how you are going to respond. What I love about this idea of stepping into someone else’s Frame of Reference is that understanding where someone is coming from may not change their opinion or yours, but it will deepen the connection that you have while you navigate your relationship.

It helps you create space for two things to be true at once, and that space is where love can exist. And trust me, I get it—it’s easy to be irritated or offended by your parents. It’s easy to blame them.

It’s also easy to feel frustrated and annoyed with the dynamics with your siblings, or your divorced parents, or your in-laws, or your stepparents, or your adult children. It’s easy to choose not to understand their perspectives.

You have to decide whether or not you’re going to accept people as they are (your family or stepfamily especially) or create the distance that you need. All it takes is one person to change the way they show up in a family, and the entire system can change for the better. And that person is you.

One of the reasons why I love the Let Them Theory is that anytime you improve yourself, it improves all your relationships, and this is particularly true with family. I have felt the impact in my own family.

The stuff that used to bother me doesn’t stress me out anymore. I don’t allow myself to get sucked into the drama. And I stay laser focused on how I show up and live my life in a way that makes me proud.

One of the things that I have determined for myself is that it is important for me to have a close relationship with my family. And wasting my time and energy allowing them to stress me out or trying to control situations that are beyond my control is a waste of time.

Because the truth is: You have limited time with your loved ones. At some point, you’re going to realize that your parents aren’t going to be here forever, and that this was their first time as a human being too.

People can only meet you as deeply as they’ve met themselves. Most people haven’t gone to therapy, haven’t looked at their issues, and they don’t want to.

Let Them. Let your parents be less than what you deserve. Let your family life be something that isn't a fairy tale. They are doing the best they can with the resources and life experiences they have. Now you get to choose what happens moving forward.

I’m not saying this to justify anything bad that happens. I’m not saying that you don't deserve better. Everyone deserves to feel seen, supported, and loved, particularly by their family.

But the fact is, most human beings have never done the work to understand themselves, heal their past, or manage their own emotions. If they haven’t done that for themselves, they are incapable of doing that for you and showing up in a way that you deserve.

Let Them. When you recognize that, you have a choice in your life. Let your family be who they are. Your dad is not changing. Your mom is not changing. Your siblings aren’t changing. Your in-laws aren’t changing. The only person you can change is you.

When you say Let Them, you are seeing your family exactly as they are for the first time in your life, perhaps. They are human. You have no control over what happened. You have no control over who they are. You can only control what you do from this point forward.

Accepting the reality of your situation doesn’t mean you’re surrendering to it. Instead, it’s about reclaiming your power to shape your future. Learn how to let adults be adults and accept people as they are. Then decide how to make the best of it, and I promise you your family dynamics will get better.

This acceptance allows you to see your family with compassion, and more importantly, it allows you to see yourself as an individual who has their own unique Frame of Reference and path in life.

Then you move to the second part, which is Let Me. Let Me figure out what kind of relationship I want to create, based on the kind of person I want to be and the values that I have.

This could mean spending time with your family not out of guilt, but because it matters to you. That might mean defining your own traditions even though it upsets your family. That might mean being one that always makes the effort even when it is not returned. It might mean saying “I love you” or “I understand” or “I forgive you” for the first time.

That might mean having the hard conversations that you have been avoiding out of fear of their opinions or judgment. That might mean freeing yourself from guilt and making some changes. And it might mean separating yourself because you no longer are willing to accept less than you deserve. And it might mean going all in while you still have time.

So let’s summarize what you have learned about fearing other people’s opinions. You currently allow your fear of other people’s opinions to control you. The Let Them Theory teaches you how to stop giving other people’s opinions power over your life; and it empowers you to live your life in a way that makes you proud of yourself.

Problem: You are giving other people’s opinions too much power. When you let the fear of what people might think dictate your choices, you limit your potential and hold yourself back from pursuing what you truly want. This fear causes you to procrastinate, doubt yourself, become paralyzed by perfectionism, and, most importantly, give up on your dreams.

Truth: People will have negative opinions about you no matter what you do. It will happen. Let Them. You can’t control it. Allowing someone else’s opinion to distract or consume you is a waste of your time and energy.

Solution: When you Let Them think what they want, it gives you the freedom to do what you want. When you align your thoughts and actions with your values, you will be proud of yourself. And when you are proud of yourself, you won’t care what anyone else thinks.



When you say Let Them, you make a decision to let people think negative thoughts about you. When you say Let Me, you focus on the one person who’s opinion truly matters—yours.

You get one wild and precious life, so go live it in a way that makes you proud.





Dealing with Someone

Else’s Emotional

Reactions





CHAPTER 7



When Grown-Ups Throw Tantrums

Now let’s dive into how you have allowed other people’s emotional reactions to influence your decisions.

The reality is adults are as emotional as children, and it is not your responsibility to manage someone else’s reactions. As long as you let other people’s emotional immaturity dictate your choices, you’ll always come last in your own life.

I had no idea how big of a problem this was for me, and neither do you. From navigating guilt trips, to fearing disappointment, to worrying about someone’s reaction or if “now is the right time,” to tiptoeing around someone’s mood, you’re allowing other people’s behaviors and reactions to drain your energy.

But it goes deeper than that. Their passive-aggressive behavior, guilt trips, and emotional outbursts are driving your decisions. This is why you say yes when you really want to say no. You cave when you should stand firm. This is why it’s hard for you to set boundaries. This is why you walk on eggshells when certain people are in a bad mood.

Sure, it feels easier in the moment to give in to your sister’s guilt trip, but, in the long run, you lose a crucial piece of yourself. When every interaction with your girlfriend or boyfriend leaves you emotionally exhausted, ask yourself this: Why are you always the one who has to adjust? Why do you take on the responsibility for someone else’s happiness—at the expense of your own?

You will always come last if you let other people’s emotional immaturity have power over you. Instead of taking on the weight of someone’s disappointment, anger, or guilt, you’ll learn a liberating new approach: Just Let Them react.

When you say Let Them, you give other people the space to feel their emotions without needing to fix them. When you say Let Me, you do what’s right for you, even if it upsets someone, which is how you take responsibility for your own life.

It’s time to stop being manipulated by someone else’s guilt, anger, or disappointment. Other people’s emotional reactions are not your responsibility to manage. I learned this from my therapist, Anne Davin, Ph.D., who is a depth psychologist, writer, and the smartest woman I’ve ever met. One day, I was talking with her about creating boundaries with a particularly difficult family member.

The thing is, I don’t want this person to bother me. It’s just that they have this way of constantly making it about them. I bet you have someone in your family like this. You know an evening with this person is going to be incredibly draining. If the attention is not on them, they have endless ways of bringing it back to them—positive or negative.





What If We Are All Just Eight Years Old?


So I was talking to Anne about this person and she said something that changed everything:

“Mel, most adults are just eight-year-old children inside of big bodies. The next time you’re with this person and you feel yourself getting triggered by something they say or some way that they act, I want you to just imagine the fourth-grade version of them present in the room with you. Because what you’re describing is someone who has the emotional maturity of an eight-year-old. And, like it or not, that’s most adults.”

Honestly, as I sat there and processed what she was saying, it made a lot of sense. It’s true. Most people don’t know how to process their emotions in a healthy way, much less communicate their needs in a direct and respectful fashion. I know I certainly didn’t.

Just think about it: Why else does your mom pout instead of saying what’s wrong? Why does your friend give you the silent treatment? Why does your boyfriend send you passive-aggressive texts when you’re out with friends? Why does your sister blow up, then act like nothing happened an hour later?

It’s because adults, at their core, are just as emotional as children. The difference is, they are better at hiding it. . . most of the time.

But here’s what’s beautiful about the Let Them Theory: It doesn’t make you more judgmental—it makes you more compassionate. Instead of getting frustrated, you begin to understand that most people simply don’t have the tools to handle their emotions maturely.

The truth is that no one has been taught how to do this. To handle your emotions, you have to understand them and know how to process them in a healthy way. And in my experience, most people have no idea how to do this. I know I certainly didn’t.

Emotional maturity isn’t something you’re born with or that just happens. It’s a skill that takes time, practice, and a desire to learn. My therapist is right. Most people you meet still act like an eight-year-old child when they don’t get what they want or when they feel uncomfortable emotions.

But now, with the Let Them Theory, you’ll learn to respond with compassion, set your boundaries, and stop letting other people’s emotional immaturity run your life. And you’re going to need this tool because the connection between adults and childlike behavior is irrefutable:





Child Behavior = Adult Behavior


Children run away from you Adults avoid confrontation

Children sulk or pout in the corner Adults give the silent treatment

Children shut down Adults act stoic

Children throw tantrums Adults erupt, rage text, and vent

Children slam doors Adults slam doors too

Children lie Adults lie too

If you read that list and someone immediately popped in your mind for each scenario, the same thing happened for me when I unpacked this with my therapist. The reason why children act like this is because they cannot regulate their own emotions.

I’ll give you an example. Let’s take a child in a toy aisle, who has selected a Lego set and wants it. The moment they are told they cannot have it, what happens?

Their little body floods with emotions: sadness, disappointment, surprise, anger. Which is why they have a dramatic emotional response and start crying, shut down, or flop down on the floor into a full-blown tantrum.

The solution is not to give the kid the toy or the Lego set. The solution is for the parent to help the child process the emotions that they’re feeling in a calm, understanding, and compassionate way.

That might look like bending down and saying, “I know this is hard. I know you want the Lego set. It’s okay to be upset. I get disappointed too. It’s not fair. I get upset when I don’t get the things that I want.”

Let Them cry, beg, or do whatever they need, for as long as they need.

If kids are not allowed to experience the full wave of emotion (without an adult saying “calm down,” or “this is silly,” or “you’re overreacting”), they never learn how to process normal human emotions in a healthy way. Instead, they become an emotionally immature adult who takes it out on the rest of us.

So I just assume that most adults have never learned how to process their emotions in a healthy way, because no one’s parents knew how to do this either, and if yours did, then you are one lucky person. A child cannot learn how to do this on their own. Like I said earlier, it’s a skill that takes time, practice, and a desire to learn.

Of course, in researching this book, I realized that as a parent, I completely screwed this up. I would have bought my kid the Legos. Or, I would have erupted in frustration and yelled “Stop crying!” Or, I would have walked away from them, left them on the floor, and turned the aisle, hoping that they would notice I was gone, suddenly get scared, and stop crying. . . which explains why all three of my children now need therapy.

I wish I were kidding. I screwed this up because I didn’t know how to regulate my own emotions. I was never taught how to do it as a child either. I grew up in a family where we didn’t talk about our feelings. People tended to just erupt in anger when they got overwhelmed and then pretend nothing had happened.

And that brings me to a very important point about the Let Them Theory, and I need to make sure I am crystal clear: Adults are 100 percent responsible for the emotional and physical needs of children. Children cannot give themselves the emotional and physical support that they need.

It is your responsibility to help a child regulate their emotional responses in a healthy way. It is also your responsibility to teach a child that emotions are normal and how to process them.

In fact, in researching this book, Lisa Damour Ph.D., who is a clinical psychologist and New York Times bestselling author, told me that when a child (or adult) experiences disappointment because they can’t have what they want, or sadness over a loss, that these are mentally healthy responses to life experiences. These emotions of sadness and disappointment are signs that you are mentally well.





Do the Feelings Fit the Circumstance?


When you are eight, being upset when you can’t get the Legos that you want is a normal reaction. When your friend at school says something that hurts your feelings, being sad is a healthy reaction. When you want to watch TV and your parents say it’s time for bed, getting upset is a normal reaction.

By the way, the same is true for adult experiences. When you are an adult, if you get fired, feeling frustrated and demoralized is a normal reaction. When you go through a breakup, it’s normal to go through a depressive state. According to Dr. Damour, these are all appropriate, normal emotional reactions. They are evidence that your mind is working exactly as it should.

But growing up, you were probably taught to repeatedly repress what you feel. When you tell a child to “get over it” or “stop crying” or “calm down,” you are training them to suppress how they feel. To distract, avoid, or numb these normal human emotions.

Dr. Damour told me that is why so many people live with anxiety, depression, addiction, or chronic pain—because they have avoided all the emotions over the years that then build up inside of them without any outlet.

I am going to say it again: It’s your responsibility to help a child create space to process their own range of emotions. But it is not your responsibility to manage another adult’s emotional reactions.

This is so important to understand. Let me unpack this further in detail.





Adult Childlike Behavior


Let’s take the very common experience of someone in your life giving you the silent treatment. The silent treatment is what an immature adult does when they’re upset and they don’t know how to process their emotions in a healthy and respectful manner.

So instead, they stop talking. They pretend nothing is wrong. And often, they ignore you. And if you’ve ever been on the receiving end of the silent treatment from a friend, a family member, or a co-worker, it’s painful, and your immediate instinct is to try to figure out what you did wrong.

And that’s exactly what the person giving you the silent treatment wants—they want your attention. Just like a child pouting off in a corner wants the parent to come over and soothe them, an adult that gives you the silent treatment wants you to ask, “Are you okay?” and “Can I do something?" and “What did I do wrong?”

They use the silent treatment because they don’t know how to process their own emotions, and they are trying to get you to come over to them and ask what’s wrong so they don’t have to do it for themselves.

I had a friend who used to do this all the time in high school. One minute we were great and the next minute she was not talking to me. And I never knew what I did wrong. I would try to call her, say hello in the hallways, and sometimes beg for forgiveness for something I didn’t even know that I had done.

She’d never address it, and then suddenly one day she’d decide she was over it—and then we were back to being best friends. I was always just so relieved when she started talking to me again that I’d just play along like nothing ever happened.

What I know now is that it was easier for her to give me the silent treatment and avoid having an honest conversation than to come to me and share how she was feeling. She didn’t even know how to do that.

One more thing to understand is that it really has nothing to do with you. When someone gives you the silent treatment, it all stems from their inability to understand their emotions or past demons.

Let Them. Any time an adult acts like an eight-year-old child, Let Them.

This strategy is going to change your life. For you it might be a parent that gets angry, storms out of the room, and refuses to talk to anybody for several days or a weekend.

Or, in the case of one of my best friends, her mother suddenly stopped talking to her for a month. And then one day she would come down the stairs in the morning, and it was as if nothing had ever happened.

Using the Let Them Theory, you’ll never again be the victim of someone else’s emotional immaturity or emotional abuse—because you will know exactly what to do.

First, it’s never your job to manage another adult’s emotions. When someone pulls the silent treatment on you, or plays the victim, or erupts in frustration, Let Them. And then I want you to visualize an eight-year-old trapped inside their body. When you do that, something wild happens. You don’t feel scared of this person. You actually pity them. You feel compassion instead of contempt.

You will also realize that their inability to process normal human emotions like sadness, insecurity, disappointment, anger, fear, and rejection is not your fault. And it’s also not your problem to solve. This has been happening to this person since they were a child.

It is not your responsibility to manage their emotions or try to fix them. Your responsibility is to protect yourself from their emotional spiral, and to see it for what it is: A person who has no idea how to handle or express their emotions in a healthy way.

Let Them go silent. Let Them erupt. Let Them play the victim. Let Them sulk. Let Them deny that it happened. Let Them make it all about them.

Then, Let Me. Let Me be the mature, wise, and loving adult in this situation. Let Me decide if I want to address this directly or not at all. Let Me remind myself that managing another person’s emotions is not my job. Let Me remove myself from any text chain, dinner table conversation, relationship, or friend group where this is happening.

Instead of expecting other people to change, demand the change of yourself. Hold yourself to a higher standard and stop allowing this type of emotionally immature behavior to be your responsibility to manage.

Stop staying in situations where someone’s repeated emotional immaturity is starting to feel more like abuse. Stop feeling sorry for people who play the victim all the time. Stop explaining away someone’s clearly narcissistic patterns.

The more time you pour into a relationship with someone who acts like an eight-year-old, the more you’re going to feel like a parent to a child. When you recognize that you are dealing with someone who has a lot of internal work to do, you can draw healthier boundaries around the amount of time and energy you are willing to give to them.

Because until this person does the work to build the skills of emotional intelligence, they will always pull the silent treatment, play the victim, or be passive aggressive. This isn’t a personality trait, it’s a pattern.





But What If You’re the Problem?


What do you do if you’re realizing as you’re reading this that there are times in your life when you’re the one who’s emotionally immature?

You get overwhelmed by your emotions. You sulk. You give the silent treatment. You rage text. You play the victim. You snap at other people. You make it about you.

If you are having this realization, here is what I want to say to you: You’re not alone. I had that realization about myself too.

It’s so easy to see this immature behavior in other people, but it takes a level of bravery and emotional intelligence to see it in yourself. For me, I wasn’t even an eight-year-old. I used to be so emotionally immature, I probably clocked in at closer to five.

I got so easily overwhelmed by my emotions that I would throw tantrums, whether it was venting at my husband or erupting at my kids over something stupid. I had periods of my life where it was all about me, and it ruined a lot of friendships. Even to this day, when work gets incredibly stressful, I send long, angry texts to my business partner about how frustrated I am by things. And it’s not okay.

Even as I am writing the Let Them Theory book and using Let Them in my life, I’m constantly learning how to create space to process my own range of emotions. This is the hardest part of the Let Them Theory to put into practice—learning to feel my raw emotions without immediately reacting. It’s hard. I still catch myself wanting to snap back or immediately take control of the situation. . . all the time. And yes, I still get frustrated when I slip up. But that’s the point: It’s not about being perfect; it’s about being kind to yourself and continuing to grow.

It’s a lifelong process, and many days, it feels like I’m starting all over again. I know this is a skill I will be working on for the rest of my life, and so will you.

The Let Them Theory has been monumental in helping me be more compassionate toward myself. It has also helped me create a deeper understanding of how to handle my emotions.

Using the Let Them Theory is straightforward when someone else is throwing the tantrum. Learning how to use it to process your own emotions will put you at rockstar status. I can’t even begin to tell you how much more money I make, how much smarter I am, and how I’m a better parent, a better spouse, and a better friend now that I have a better handle on my own emotions. I am finally starting to feel like a mature adult.

Here’s how you use the Let Them Theory to process your own emotions in a healthy way: When you feel your emotions rising up, Let Them. Allow the anger, the frustration, the hurt, the disappointment, the sadness, the grief, the tears, and the feelings of failure to come up. Let Them.

And then, Let Me not react. Don’t reach for your phone. Don’t turn on the TV. Don’t make a drink. Don’t open the fridge. And for crying out loud, don’t text anyone. Just notice the feelings and Let Them rise up.

The reason why you must learn how to Let Them rise is that once they do, they also fall.





Do You Know What an Emotion Really Is?


Emotions are just a burst of chemicals in your brain that ignite and are absorbed into your body within six seconds. Because your emotional reactions happen so fast, they can often be completely unconscious. You may first notice your emotions through the physical sensations that accompany the chemical burst, such as sweating, muscle tightness, or a racing heartbeat.

Research shows that most emotions will rise up, and then fall away, within 90 seconds, if you don’t react to them.

You cannot control your emotions from rising up. Trying to is a waste of your time. The better strategy is learning to just Let Them rise up and then fall without reacting. There is also nothing you can do that will ever allow you to control the emotional reactions in another human being, no matter how hard you try.

Emotions are also contagious. Seeing someone else sad, afraid, disgusted, or angry can cause you to experience these same emotions in your own body. This explains why someone else’s tone of voice, their shift in energy, their bad mood, and their body language can immediately trigger you to feel on edge.

And one more thing to understand is that whenever you or another person are hungry, or tired, or stressed-out, or under the influence, or lonely, or angry, or hurt, you’ll be even more emotional. I say this because whenever I do or say something I later regret, there is usually stress, alcohol, or hunger involved. Knowing all this helps me to make the changes to better manage my emotions and helps me stay in control of what I say, do, and think.

That’s one of my biggest takeaways from using the Let Them Theory: You will never be able to control what is happening around you. You will also never be able to control your emotional responses, because they are automatic—just like how your stress response turns on automatically.

But you can always choose what you think, say, or do in response to other people, the world around you, or the emotions that are rising up inside of you. That’s the source of all your power.

Learning how to let other adults manage their own emotions will change your life. So will learning how to let your own emotions rise and fall while still communicating what you need to, even when it is very painful to do so. And there will be times when making the right decision for yourself is going to be one of the hardest things you have to do in life.





CHAPTER 8



The Right Decision Often Feels Wrong

Recently, a listener of the The Mel Robbins Podcast wrote to me with this question:

Mel, I’m engaged and soon to be married. The wedding is a few weeks away and I know this should be one of the happiest moments of my life. But it’s not. The closer we get to the wedding, the more my fiancée and I are fighting. I can’t stop shaking this feeling of dread. Deep down, I am afraid I am making a huge mistake. I don’t know what to do. The invitations are out, my parents and hers have already put down the deposits for everything. I don’t want to disappoint my family. I don’t want my parents to lose their money. I don’t want to break my fiancée’s heart. I don’t want her parents and everyone else we know to be mad at me. How do I call this off?



Just reading the question, I could feel my heart seize. I bet yours did too. When the stakes feel this high, the right answer always feels wrong.

On the surface, the answer is simple, even though it doesn’t feel like it. He should call it off. If you’re dreading the wedding, you are making a mistake. If you can’t stop thinking about calling it off, then you should.

Just because the right decision seems clear, doesn’t always mean it’s an easy decision to make. That’s because the human experience is largely an emotional one.

What seems logical on the surface doesn’t feel logical when you know it will cause other people a lot of pain.

Too often in life, when you’re in that dilemma, you choose to inflict the pain on yourself instead of making a decision that you know is right for you but is going to be painful for other people to accept.

The groom who wrote to me knows, intellectually, what he needs to do. The problem is his emotions. He wrote to me because he is seeking reassurance. He has absolutely no idea how to handle what he’s feeling, or how to deal with the emotional upset it will trigger in other people.

Agonizing over a difficult decision is a mentally healthy response to a very difficult situation. The fact that he is worried about other people is a sign that he’s a good person.

There will be many times in your life when people are going to be mad, disappointed, or heartbroken by the things you say or do. There just will be. You have to be able to separate yourself from your emotions and the emotional reactions of others when you’re determining the right decision to make.

You can’t let your emotions drive your decisions, because they will often stop you from making the right decisions.

This is a hell of a lot more difficult than it seems. It can be devastating to make the right decisions. It can be absolutely heartbreaking to be honest with someone. It can feel like that decision might destroy you from the inside out, especially when it hurts someone you love.

Just take the situation with our groom who wants to call off his wedding and doesn’t know how. You probably felt a wave of dread wash over you as you read through the message, and you and I don’t even know this person.

That’s how powerful emotions are.

You feel the weight in your chest as you picture him sitting his fiancée down and saying, “We have to talk.” You can imagine him making the phone call and telling his parents. You can almost hear the sobbing as his fiancée buries her face into her hands. Your heart tightens as you picture the grief clogging her throat when she calls her parents. You can feel the anger swelling up in her dad’s chest as he experiences the heartbreak of his baby girl. “Dad, he ended it,” she might say. “He called off the wedding.”

You’re just reading and thinking about the situation, and it’s creating an emotional reaction inside of you. And this is why letting people down and breaking their hearts is one of the hardest things you’ll have to do in life.

Adults are allowed to feel how they’re going to feel—and they’re allowed to be angry. Broken. Devastated. Overwhelmed. Embarrassed. And extremely pissed off at you.

You can’t control it.

But you try to control it by avoiding the truth. We’ve all done this. It’s why you’ve found yourself staying in the wrong relationships or the wrong jobs or the wrong patterns of behavior for years.

It’s why you still haven’t called out your friend for talking behind your back, or confronted your mom, or taken a leave of absence, or confessed to your best friend that you are in love with them.

It feels easier to avoid it, because avoiding it means that you don’t have to face it. But easier now makes it way harder later. Avoiding the hard conversations now won’t make them any better next year.

In fact, from experience I can tell you that the longer you wait, the more painful it gets. Choosing not to do what’s right for you will do nothing but cause you more pain.

So, did the groom call off the wedding? I don’t know. Do I hope he did? Yes. I hope so for his sake, and I hope so for hers. Everyone deserves to be with someone who wants to be with them.

In life the most courageous, honorable, and kind thing to do is tell someone you don’t want to be with them. It’s hard to be honest, especially when other people are emotionally immature.

You don’t want to deal with their guilt, venting, and bad moods, so you just avoid them. You’re not avoiding confrontation—you’re avoiding someone else’s emotions. The only conflict is the conflict you’re going to feel internally about how your decisions are going to impact other people emotionally and how they’re going to react.

It’s why people stay in marriages for a decade that they know have ended. It’s why people stay in jobs for too long. It’s why people pick majors and career paths and stay in them because they’re afraid of making a decision that’s going to cause someone else to feel something. And if you understand that emotions are a normal part of life, and that adults are allowed to feel the ups and downs and can survive it, you would be more courageous. It’s not your job to protect everybody else from feeling emotions. Your job and responsibility is to live your life in a way that is aligned with your values, and in a way that gets you.

Sometimes that’s going to hurt someone. It’s going to disappoint them. It’s going to cause pain or heartbreak knowing that your decision will hurt someone else—and it’s going to be one of the hardest things you’re going to do in life. When I know my actions may disappoint or upset someone, I find it helpful to remember Dr. Damour’s framing that negative emotions are a mentally healthy response to life’s upsets.

People are allowed to be upset when you change your mind, and disappointed or heartbroken when you break up. People are allowed to be depressed when they lose their job.

So how do you do this, and how do you manage the excruciating level of guilt and discomfort YOU are going to feel when you make a hard decision that you know is the right decision for you?





Learn to Ride the Emotional Wave


What’s helped me is thinking about emotional discomfort like learning to ride a wave in the ocean. Because, at their core, emotions are like waves. They rise, they fall.

Some days, your life is going to be steady, still, and calm. Other days, like the day you call off the wedding, there’s a hurricane that hits, and you’re going to feel like you’re drowning. But you will not drown.

Will it suck to call off the wedding? Yes. Will it be one of the most painful experiences of your life? Yes. Will her dad want to kill you? Definitely, for at least a few months. Will your parents lose their deposit and be angry with you? Yes. Will their hearts break because they love your fiancée too? Yes.

They’re going to grieve the loss of what they thought would have been great.

And then slowly, as you Let Them feel whatever they need to feel, and you let yourself feel whatever you need to feel, and you don’t try to control it or avoid it or change it, life has a way of going back to a new normal.

Eventually your parents will understand not only why you made the decision, but they will also be proud of you for having the bravery to do it. Let Them.

Let Me is the part where you remind yourself that this too shall pass. You are stronger than anyone else’s emotional reaction. Let Them have their opinions. Let Them have their reactions. Let Me have mine. Let your emotions rise up and give yourself the space to process your emotions too.

Never let someone else’s emotional reactions keep you from making the hard decision. Let Me be honest with myself and others. Let Me do the hard thing that is painful now, because it is the right thing to do and will save me from so much pain later. Let Me give myself the opportunity to have the life I deserve.

So let’s summarize what you have learned about dealing with someone else’s emotional reactions. Right now, you allow other people’s emotional reactions to dictate your choices. The Let Them Theory empowers you to take a step back when another adult is acting like a child.

Problem: You’re allowing other people’s emotional immaturity to have power over your life. You’re allowing somone else’s outbursts, guilt trips, and reactions to dictate your actions, leading you to constantly manage their emotions rather than focusing on your own. This means you’re always prioritizing the emotional needs of others at the expense of your own happiness.

Truth: Other people’s emotional reactions are not your responsibility to manage. You cannot control how others feel or respond; nor can you fix their emotional immaturity. Most adults have the emotional capacity of an eight-year-old and you can’t change that.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, you can stay in control even when an adult is acting like a child and having an emotional outburst. Make the right decisions for you, even if they make other people upset. You maintain your power when you stop taking on the burden of others’ emotions and act in a way that aligns with your values.



When you say Let Them, you give others the space to experience their emotions without making it your responsibility to manage or fix them. When you say Let Me, you find the courage to make the right decisions for you, even if it will feel wrong to others.

It’s time to grow up and act like a mature adult.





Overcoming Chronic

Comparison





CHAPTER 9



Yes, Life Isn’t Fair

The truth is: Life isn’t fair. But at some point, you’ve got to wake up, accept that fact, and stop obsessing over what other people have, what they look like, and what they’ve achieved.

So let’s talk about something that every single person on this planet struggles with: Allowing other people’s success to paralyze you.

The reality is, you can’t control another person’s success, luck, or timing in life. The only thing you can control is what you do with the example other people set and the actions you take next.

When you see other people’s lives as evidence that you’re a failure, or you’re unattractive, or not good enough, you become your biggest obstacle. Mindlessly scrolling on social media, or feeling inferior to someone else makes you feel stuck, hopeless, and perpetually behind. You are torturing yourself for no reason. You’re letting other people paralyze you, which leads to procrastination and self-criticism.

When you focus on how unfair life seems and compare yourself to others, you’re draining your motivation and keeping yourself from moving forward. It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. You are failing because of your chronic habit of comparing yourself.

You are the problem. And the first step is accepting the truth: Life isn’t fair. It’s just not.

It’s not fair that you’re drowning in student debt because you couldn’t afford the tuition.

It’s not fair that your sister looks like a supermodel and everyone flocks to her at the bars, while you’re sitting there off to the side buying your own drinks.

It’s not fair that your supervisor keeps giving you the crappy shift at work.

It’s not fair that your country is torn apart by war.

It’s not fair that you were born diabetic and have had to manage your insulin for your entire life.

It’s not fair that your friend has a nice house or apartment because their parents paid for it.

It’s not fair that your colleague got promoted and you didn’t. It’s not fair that you just got diagnosed with breast cancer. It’s not fair that your friend seemingly has the perfect family life, while yours is so bad they wouldn’t even put you guys on a reality show. It’s not fair that your friend has a fast metabolism and can eat whatever she wants. It’s not fair that you have asthma because you grew up in a polluted area. It’s not fair that the cost of living and gas prices keep rising. It’s not fair that your face is breaking out with acne.

You’re right. It’s not fair.

The fact is, every human being is dealt a different hand in life and you can’t control the cards that someone else is holding. The more time you spend staring at someone else, the more you miss the entire point of the game.

In life, you’re not playing against anyone. You’re playing with them. Someone will always have better cards than yours. It’s not about the hand you’ve been dealt; it’s how you play it.

And while you’ve been busy comparing yourself to everyone else, you’ve missed one of the greatest secrets in life: Other people teach you how to be a better player, and that’s how you win.

It’s true, a lot of people have been dealt a “luckier” or “more successful” hand of cards. Let Them.

They are going to achieve things faster. They have a leg up. They have more resources. They have more support. There is nothing you can do to change it. It’s a fact. Let Them.

Because worrying about it, or making yourself feel bad, is an insult to your intelligence. You can figure out how to win. You can learn how to work with what you’ve got and start where you are and create anything you want in life.

But you will never do that if you give all of your power to this stupid and toxic habit of comparing yourself to other people. Stop it.

Wishing everyone flocked to you instead of your sister at the bar, or that it was you on those European vacations, or that you were taller or had a healthier complexion, or a better job, or the wedding proposal, or more money isn’t going to make it appear. It just makes your confidence disappear.

Any world-class card player will tell you, it’s not about the hand you’ve been dealt. It’s about how you play the hand. Winning the game of life requires you to focus on the cards you have and choosing what to do with them.

And look, I get it! It sucks to look at the hand you are holding and feel you have been dealt the unluckiest hand on the planet. It’s easy to say “Why me?” It’s easy to feel sorry for yourself. It’s easy to look at someone else and make yourself feel bad because they have the body, the bank account, a loving relationship, perfect health, the car, the trust fund, the safety, the discipline, the friend group. . . because it is not fair. And you know what? Life is never going to be fair.

Some people are just really lucky. I have friends who seem to have had everything figured out from the day they were born. It feels like they have gotten everything they wanted. Positive things and experiences just pop up left and right. Everything always seems to just work out for them.

Why did these people get so lucky and I didn’t? It’s so easy to feel sorry for yourself and get angry at these people, right? They have the world’s best family; they met the love of their life in college; they are superattractive and a gifted athlete. Nothing seems to go wrong for these people. And as far as you can tell, they don’t struggle with depression, anxiety, or any kind of childhood trauma like the rest of us.

But comparing yourself to someone else’s luck in life is a waste of your time.





When Comparison Is Torturing You


“But, Mel, I can’t stop obsessing over how much more attractive other people are, or how I wish I were taller or didn’t have asthma, or wishing that my parents didn’t get divorced and my family life was better.”

Comparing yourself to other people is unavoidable. It is human nature to look around and see what everyone else is doing and how you measure up.

The problem isn’t the tendency to compare. The problem is what you’re doing with the comparison that matters.

So ask yourself: What are you doing when you compare? Are you torturing yourself, or is it teaching you something important?

The fact is, there are two different types of comparison that people engage in: torture or teacher. In order to use comparison to your advantage, you must first identify which type of comparison you are doing, and it’s very easy to tell the difference.

The first type of comparison is torture. This is when you find yourself obsessed over, caught up in, or beating yourself up over something that you will never be able to change. Comparison feels like torture when you’re focused on fixed attributes of someone else’s life.

For example, someone else’s natural beauty, body type, family history, height, metabolism, parents, country of origin, past experiences, and any God-given talents like athleticism, perfect pitch, genius brain power, ability to learn languages at the blink of an eye, photographic memory, artistic talents. . . you get the gist.

You may be envious of these fixed characteristics of someone else’s life, but these are the types of things people were usually born with and not something they worked hard to achieve. They were dealt these cards, and their cards are not going anywhere (and neither are yours).

And more importantly, no amount of effort on your part will make these cards magically appear in your life.

Here’s how you know it’s fixed. Is there anything you can do in the next 30 seconds to change this? If not, you’re never going to be able to change these things.

It’s critical that you understand the difference between things you can and cannot change, because comparing yourself to someone or some aspect of their life that you cannot change, no matter how much you try, is just torturing you.

Therefore, any time you spend obsessing over a fixed aspect of someone else’s life versus your own is an act self-torture. It is useless for your growth and detrimental to your happiness. If you can’t change it, you must learn to allow it. Let Them.

This is not easy to do.

I have watched our oldest daughter, Sawyer, engage in this first type of comparison and torture herself for years. She is hyper fixated on her younger sister, Kendall, who has a completely different body type, bone structure, metabolism, and athletic abilities. To top it off, Kendall was born with an amazing singing voice and perfect pitch.

Sawyer cannot change this. Kendall cannot change this. And I can’t change this.

But over the years, I have watched Sawyer make herself miserable and give so much of her power away by engaging in torturous comparison. As a result, she hates her body. She beats herself up about her metabolism. She complains about how hard it is to lose weight and how easy it is to put it on. She’s made it clear how unfair it is that Kendall can fit into her clothes, but she can’t fit into Kendall’s.

And you know what. . . she’s right. It’s not fair. And no amount of exercise, or supplements, or singing lessons will ever even the score that Sawyer is keeping in her mind: Kendall is winning and Sawyer is losing.

This is what psychologists call upward comparison. Upward comparison is this tendency to measure yourself against people and their attributes that you think are better than yours. Research shows it destroys your self-esteem.

You rarely engage in downward comparison, which is looking around and seeing how much better off are than the majority of people in the world. According to the U.N., one in four people do not have access to clean drinking water. The truth is, if you have running water, electricity, and the time to read this book, you’re doing better than most people.

That brings me back to this type of torturous comparison and beating yourself up over aspects of your life that you cannot control or change.

I’ve watched with so much sadness in my heart at how miserable Sawyer makes herself. And I can’t save her. I can’t stop her from engaging in this kind of comparison. And no amount of complimenting or reassurance is going to change her behavior. She must choose to change this for herself.

Because until she stops torturing herself, she will never see the big, beautiful, amazing life that is right there waiting for her to embrace it. She will never embrace the beauty of her own body. And she will always see what she is not, instead of the magnificence of what she is. While she’s focused on her sister, she is not seeing what the rest of us see, which is her unique talents, brains, and athleticism.

You must stop obsessing over the cards in someone else’s hands. Life isn’t fair. Someone will always seem to have better cards than you and comparing your hand to theirs will always make you lose. Stop focusing on the other players; that’s not how you win the game of life. Learn to play with other players, not against them.

The sad fact is I have seen too many people develop an eating disorder or mental health problems or struggle with addiction or shame because of the torturous nature of this type of comparison. And I don’t say this lightly because I know it can lead to very serious struggles and challenges that many people face, including people I love deeply.

Psychologists will tell you that the root cause of many disorders is an obsessive need for control. As you are learning in this book, any time you try to control something that you can’t, it just makes you feel more out of control and powerless.

That’s why it’s imperative for you to recognize when you are engaging in this first type of comparison.

Stop. Let Them live their life. Let Me focus on mine.

You’re too smart to waste your life torturing yourself. Hold on to your power, because you’re going to need it to unlock the potential of your own unique life. What I’ve found is that being happier requires you to allow yourself to be happier.

It is impossible to enjoy your life or love yourself and beat yourself up at the same time.

So let’s move on to the second type of comparison. This type of comparison is a gold mine for you.





CHAPTER 10



How to Make Comparison Your Teacher

You just learned about the first type of comparison, which feels like self-torture. Now let’s talk about the second type: comparison that is teaching you something. And here’s how you know that comparison is good: You’re looking at aspects of someone else’s life or success that you could create for yourself.

With time and consistent effort, these aspects of your life, career, or health could be changed.

The list of things you could change is endless: from your job, to creating a better friend group, to finding your purpose, to spending more time with your kids, to vacations, to creating financial freedom; getting up earlier, finding and creating the greatest love story of your life, being an amazing cook, or getting in the best shape of your life; buying a huge ring, a fancy watch, or a sports car; renovating your kitchen, building a second home, creating a better relationship with your stepparents, developing healthier habits, writing a book, healing your trauma, gaining more social media followers, having better boundaries and more time for yourself, launching a business, or developing a better reputation.

I wrote a long list on purpose. The fact is, 95 percent of the things that you want in life are things that you can create if you are willing to work hard, be consistent and disciplined and patient. Very little about your life is fixed in stone.

If someone has done something better, and bigger, and cooler than you could ever imagine, Let Them. Let Them have their success. Let Them beat you to it. Let Them do it in the smartest and the coolest way. Their success gives you the formula. Remember my story about not posting on social media? Whatever it is that you want, someone else can give you the formula. Let Them lead the way.

For most of my life, I didn’t understand this. If someone achieved what I wanted, I told myself they had beat me to it. I looked at people around me and saw other people’s wins as my losses. And when you see other people’s wins as your losses, it will make you feel defeated before you even start.

If you’re not careful, comparison can become the reason why you doubt yourself, procrastinate, and continue to stay stuck. You’re capable of achieving the same success, but instead of working to create it, you’re actively arguing against what you want. This is an example of how you’ve turned other people into a problem, and they don’t need to be.

There is enough happiness, success, and money to go around for absolutely everyone including you. It is in limitless supply.

No one is taking anything from you. Happiness, success, and money are waiting for you to get serious about creating them. I will say this again: No one else’s wins are your losses. That’s why you have to change the way you look at other people’s success.

The truth is, there are more than 8 billion people on this planet. If you are looking for evidence that someone else makes more money, has the coolest wardrobe, has the best friend group, went to a more prestigious school, is in the best shape, sold their company, is a New York Times bestselling author, has traveled the world, or quite literally has anything you could ever want. . . you’ll find it.

The problem isn’t the tendency to compare. The problem is not using comparison to your advantage. Using the Let Them Theory, you will learn how to flip comparison from a major problem in your life into your greatest teacher.





They’ve Always Been Your Teacher


Recently I was talking with a friend of mine named Molly. Molly is an extremely talented interior designer. She has built a successful business, has a number of employees, and does beautiful work for her clients.

The last few times that she and I have connected, she always asked me for advice about social media, asking questions like, “Mel, how can I get myself out there? I know I need to be doing more on social media, and doing a better job marketing my business and work online, but I don’t know where to start.”

For every business, there’s a formula, so I gave her a simple list of things she could do: Start posting every day. Create videos explaining your projects. Post before-and-after photos. Hire an intern that creates a library of short videos for you. Take a free online course to learn more about the social media platforms, and pick one to focus on.

Just like in the example I gave you earlier, from when I wanted to build my speaking business years ago, the steps you need to take are always very simple. The problem is not doing them.

Molly called me the other day, and immediately I could tell something was off. “Molly, you don’t sound like yourself. Is everything okay with the kids?”

She said, “Yeah, yeah, yeah. The kids are fine. I’m not.”

And I said, “What happened?”

She said, “Well, I saw something the other night that sent me into a spiral. And I’ve been freaking out ever since.”

And so I’m listening and I’m thinking, What the heck could have happened? My gosh. This is really serious.

It turns out that there is someone in Molly’s neighborhood that she’s known for a long time. She is not exactly Molly’s favorite person—you know, the kind of person who is always drawing attention to themselves and just rubs you the wrong way. The energy between them has never clicked.

This person has no interior design experience or background. And now, they’ve gotten into the “design” business, started posting on social media, and suddenly their posts are blowing up. This person is getting thousands of likes on her posts, and what really burns Molly up is that everyone in the neighborhood is now talking about how “talented” this other woman is.

As Molly vented to me, “These are just photos of her own house, and she didn’t even design it!”

The night before, after a long day of work dealing with her design clients, Molly had put the kids to bed, sat down on the couch, and started scrolling. Guess who was all over Molly’s feed? This irritating woman.

She couldn’t help herself. She read every single comment and she stalked the woman’s website. The website looked modern and clean, whereas Molly’s hasn’t been updated in three years. The way in which the other woman was marketing herself was so impressive. It made her look very professional, like she’d been doing this for years. And that sent Molly into a downward spiral.

She is going to steal my clients! Everyone is going to think she is better than me. How does she know how to do all this? Why didn’t I do this sooner? Argghhhhhhhh!

She then took a breath, and said, “Mel, what do you think I should do?”

I’m going to tell you the same thing I told my friend Molly, and I want you to remember this the next time you find yourself burning up with comparison or anger about what someone else is doing:

No one should feel sorry for you. If you are jealous right now about someone else’s success, GOOD. I’m happy for you. Jealousy is an invitation from your future self. It is inviting you to look more closely at someone else—not to make you feel inferior, but to show you what is possible.

This woman was not stealing any success from Molly. She was not preventing Molly from changing her website or focusing on social media. This woman’s wins online were not Molly’s losses. Because other people are never going to stop you from achieving what’s meant for you. They can’t. Only you can stop yourself from achieving it.

This woman is a reminder to Molly that social media matters. She is a teacher who is leading the way. Let Them wake you up. Let Them be successful. Let Them dazzle you with their beautiful web design.





Let Them Show That It’s Possible


Maybe you’ve been so caught up in your day-to-day that you’ve ignored what’s right in front of you. Maybe you’ve been playing so small that you can’t see how big and beautiful your life could be. Maybe you’re so used to doing things the way you’ve always done them, you’ve been reluctant to try a new way.

Other people show you what’s possible. When you see comparison as a teacher, you’ll realize other people aren’t taking anything from you; they are giving something to you. Other people have this beautiful capacity to show you pieces of your future that you cannot fully see for yourself yet. They show you possibilities that you didn’t realize existed or told yourself you are incapable of achieving.

Whoever or whatever is making you jealous, GOOD. Their success and their wins don’t shrink your chances of creating what you want. They expand it. Let Them lead the way. Flip your jealousy to inspiration. See what’s possible through their example. The people you compare yourself to act as mirrors, reflecting back bigger possibilities—or in Molly’s case, the formula and the work she was avoiding. And that’s what I said to Molly. Let Them lead the way.

That brings me to a very important point: There’s an important reason why this woman got under Molly’s skin. The truth is, it had to be this irritating person. In life, if you’re not motivated to do something, it’s going to take something painful to force you to change.

In Molly’s case, she had been watching famous interior designers for years. She had been talking about “doing social media” for years. She had every excuse in the book for why she didn’t make it a priority.

Until now. . . all of a sudden, this irritating woman comes along, with no prior design experience, and Molly sees her doing all the things deep down she knew she needed to do years ago.

Molly knows that this woman from the neighborhood has no special advantage, talent, or resources. That’s why she’s so mad. This irritating woman is shoving a simple fact in Molly’s face: If I can do it, you can do it too.

This is where comparison gets really interesting. These types of people in your life force you to look in the mirror and call yourself out.

So, Let Them make you mad. You need to be thanking this person that makes you mad, because you’re not actually mad at them. That anger that is burning you up inside is you being mad at yourself, because you know that you could have gotten to work sooner, and you know you are capable of figuring this out. You just didn’t. This was me in the speaking business. That’s why I say this kind of comparison is your greatest teacher.

Not because it shows you what you need to be doing, but because it galvanizes your power and awakens your anger. And you need your anger as the fuel to get you going.

So whoever it is that’s triggering you, Let Them. Let Them irritate you. Let Them burn you up. And Let Them show you EXACTLY what you want and what you need to be doing to get there.





Let’s Talk About You


How do you turn these moments of jealousy and frustration into something good? How do you flip comparison into inspiration? Simple. Say Let Me and look at the data other people’s successes provide.

Anytime you find yourself playing the game of comparison, there is something really important happening.

Comparison shows you the areas of your life that need more of your attention.

It means the time for thinking and excuses is over. Let Me get to work. Put in the reps. It’s a phrase my buddy bestselling author Jeff Walker always says, “Success is about putting in the reps.” What’s that mean? Simple: To be successful, to lose weight, to write a book, or to become a YouTuber, you have to show up every day and do the boring, irritating, and uncomfortable work. You’ve got to put in the reps.

Think about any change you want in your life, like going to the gym. How do you build muscle? You show up every day and you put in the reps. The famous quarterback Tom Brady recently said about success, “The truth is you don’t have to be special. You just have to be what most people aren’t: consistent, determined, and willing to work for it.”

All these people who stir up your jealousy are here to show you the simple fact that while you have been making excuses, they’ve been putting in the reps, slowly chipping away at the boring, hard stuff.

In the words of Tom Brady, they aren’t special; they’ve just been what you aren’t: consistent, determined, and willing to work for it. That is 1,000 percent the secret to my success.

That brings me back to my friend Molly. She knew in her heart that she needed to start prioritizing this several years ago. Part of the reason it’s so painful right now is that she’s seeing the fruits of someone else’s efforts. This will keep happening if you don’t start to move on the things that you want.

That beautiful website that Molly was so mad about—it didn’t pop up overnight. That woman had been working on it for months. The social media strategy that was burning Molly up didn’t magically happen. While Molly was making excuses, the other woman was researching, studying, learning, and creating all of the posts that Molly now sees.

The reason why these people make you so angry is because you know you could do it too. And you are just mad that you didn’t start doing it a long time ago. The fact is, inspiration is not enough to get you motivated to do something.

This is why anger is important. This is why comparison can be one of your greatest teachers, and I am willing to bet when it happens, it will likely be someone you know who makes you mad. It will be Aron down the hall. All of a sudden he’s quitting his job and he is working full-time on his custom boat business that he’s been building in the dark on the weekends while you’ve been busy going out with your friends.

That’s why it makes you jealous when you see him walk out the door. Because when the people that you know do it, it means that you can’t make excuses for why you can’t. If you’ve been sitting next to Aron at work for a year, you know there’s no superpower, trust fund, or upper hand. They just started working on it. And now they’re quitting. That makes you so jealous. That’s why it had to be them.

It’s perfectly normal to be upset as you see someone’s beautiful website, or as you watch a colleague walk out the door to a new life, or as you step into your friend’s beautiful new home. But if you’re serious about being successful or healthy or achieving your goals, you have no time to be upset, and you cannot afford to waste your energy being jealous. You need that energy, because you have work to do.

These moments are really painful, and they are going to happen a lot in your life—so get ready for it. Using the Let Them Theory, you’ll be able to recognize when comparison is trying to teach you something. Jealousy is a doorway to your future cracked open, and it’s your job to recognize when it happens, kick the door open, and walk right through it.

When you let other people lead the way, you’ll realize that beneath all the fear and excuses and time wasted is the life you’ve wanted all along. Right now the only things that are holding you back from taking control of your life are the excuses, fears, and emotions that we have been discussing throughout this entire book.

This is where you go from trying to control what everyone else thinks, feels, and does, and you take your time and your energy and use it to create the best chapter of your life. This is so important I’m going to give you one more example from my life.

The point of this story is that it’s not always obvious what your jealousy is teaching you. In my 40s, back when we were struggling financially and before I had built any of the career I have today, I had a friend who was doing a huge house renovation.

Every time we went out to lunch or on a walk, I wanted to hear all about the renovations and see all of the progress photos. It was so fun to follow along. However, every time I left and went back to our house, I just felt. . . discouraged and sad.

I will never forget the day that Chris and I pulled up my friend’s long, winding driveway when their renovations were complete and my mouth dropped to the floor. The house was beautiful.

As my friend led a bunch of us on a tour of the house, I found myself going down a comparison spiral. HOW the heck do they have so much money?! I remember thinking.

Of course, I was happy for her, but I was also so damn jealous. She absolutely deserved this, and she and her husband had both worked so hard for years. And they had earned every right to build it, to talk about it, to enjoy it, and to be proud of it.

I knew this deep down, but I did not know how to genuinely feel happy for my friend without feeling insanely jealous and insecure at the same time. When she swung open the doors to the playroom, I almost combusted.

“This is the upstairs play loft with the pool table and hangout area for the kids to enjoy now—and responsibly, when they are older, with friends,” she told us.

With that, she gave us a wink, and we all laughed.

“And then here is the bunk room for all the kiddos and their friends to have sleepovers in. And my kids love it so much, they don’t even want to sleep in their own rooms now.”

My jaw dropped. No wonder my kids always wanted to go to my friend’s house and didn’t want to host friends at ours. Queen-size bunk beds? A playroom above the garage? Hello. . . this was a kid’s dream, and it had always been my dream to have “the house” where all the kids hung out too.

At this point in the tour, I was ready to go downstairs, steal a bottle of wine, and crawl into one of these queen-size bunk beds—that’s how sorry I felt for myself. I felt like such a horrible person for letting my jealousy sour my true happiness for her. Not only is she an incredible friend, loved by everyone, and gorgeous inside and out, she now has my dream home.

As the night went on, I tried to push the pit in my stomach down. I tried to act like I was completely unbothered by it all. But once I was in the car with Chris and on our way home, I didn’t have to stifle the jealousy. . . so I threw it at him.

So like a typical eight-year-old, I had a full-blown tantrum in front of him.

“We’ll never have a house like that,” I snapped. “Why did you have to go into the restaurant business?”

Chris didn’t know what to say, so we drove home in tense silence.

I can share this story with such detail because we have unpacked this moment in marriage counseling so many times. It would be easy to think this story was about a house. It wasn’t. The truth that I needed to discover was so much deeper. Comparing myself to my friend and the anger that I felt was teaching me a life-changing lesson.

I wasn’t mad at her. I wasn’t even mad at my husband. I was mad at myself because I had given up on my own ambition. I had counted on my husband being successful and providing me with the financial support to have the things that I wanted in life. The truth is, your life is your responsibility. If you want financial success, it is your responsibility to create it. If you want a house that has queen bunk beds and a renovated kitchen, it is your responsibility to work for it.

I had been avoiding that responsibility for a decade. This experience forced me to look in the mirror and be honest with myself about what I wanted. Jealousy was in fact a message from my future self. Seeing my friend win allowed me to see bigger possibilities for me winning too.

And I kicked the door open, and I got to work. I am not special. I just did what I was unwilling to do before. I got consistent, determined, and willing to work for what I wanted. I started putting in the reps. It took 15 years of hard work to get my queen-size bunk beds. But I did it and so can you.

The Let Them Theory will help you dig deep and get to the truth of what jealousy is trying to teach you, and where you have let yourself down. If all you ever do is stay on the surface wasting your time and energy on other people and on things beyond your control, you will never discover the deeper meaning and possibilities in your life.

You have a beautiful and amazing life to live. You have potential beyond your imagination. You are not limited by where you live, or the circumstances you are facing, or the aspects of your life that you believe are limitations.

If you can be honest with yourself about what you truly want, and take responsibility for creating it, you will. You don’t have to be special. You just have to get up every day, put one foot in front of the other, and work hard to do a little better, and be a little better, than you were yesterday. And one of these days, you are going to wake up and realize that you not only changed yourself, but you are in the middle of living the life you were once jealous of.

So let’s summarize what you have learned about overcoming chronic comparison. Until now, you have allowed other people’s success to paralyze you. The Let Them Theory teaches you to let others have their success while also using it as inspiration to build the life you want.

Problem: When you focus on how unfair life seems and compare yourself to others, you waste your precious time and energy on things beyond your control. You let others’ success paralyze you, leaving you stuck, and feeling behind and frustrated. This mindset fuels procrastination and perfectionism, preventing you from taking action to create your own success.

Truth: There will always be someone who is luckier, has what you want, is further along, or achieves success more quickly than you. Comparing yourself to others is a natural instinct; but when it consumes your thoughts, it undermines your confidence and motivation. You can’t control the success of others, but you can control how you respond to it.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, stop torturing yourself and use comparison to your advantage. Let others have their success and leverage it to fuel your own journey. Other people’s success is evidence that you can do it too. By turning inspiration into action, you begin to build the extraordinary life you deserve.



When you say Let Them, you learn from other people’s success and Let Them lead the way. When you say Let Me, you focus on playing the cards in your hand, turning inspiration into action, and winning by playing with others, not against them.

It’s time to play your hand and win the game of life.

You’ve just finished the first half of this book, and by now, you’ve felt the power of the Let Them Theory starting to work in your life. You’ve learned how freeing it is to stop wasting energy on what you can’t control—other people’s behaviors, opinions, and expectations—and instead focus on yourself.

The more you say Let Them and Let Me, the more you’ll free up mental space, emotional energy, and time you never knew you had. With that freedom, you can now show up differently for yourself and in your relationships—the areas where Let Them will have the deepest impact.

In the next section, we’ll explore how to use the theory to navigate the delicate dynamics of adult relationships. Whether it’s friendships, family, romantic relationships, or co-workers, you’ll discover how to set clear boundaries, strengthen bonds, and finally release the exhausting need to manage everyone else.

Right now, you might feel frustrated, lonely, or unsure if the connections you want are possible.

But here’s the truth: The best relationships of your life are still ahead of you. The most fulfilling friendships, the most beautiful love stories, and the most incredible bonds with family members are waiting for you if you learn to accept people for who they are and stop trying to force a relationship to be something it’s not.

The more you release your expectations, control, and the need to fix others, the more your relationships will flourish. It’s never too late to find amazing friends, make amends, strengthen family ties, or create the love you’ve always dreamed of.

How exciting is it that the most meaningful moments of your life and the deepest connections are just around the corner?

If you apply the Let Them Theory, they are. So let’s get started.





Your Relationships and the Let Them Theory



Mastering Adult Friendship

Motivating Other People to Change

Helping Someone Who Is Struggling

Choosing the Love You Deserve





The more you let people

be who they are, the better

your relationships will be.

— Mel Robbins





Mastering Adult

Friendship





CHAPTER 11



The Truth No One Told You about Adult Friendship

Let’s be honest: Adult friendship is hard. Every person I know is struggling with adult friendships: creating them, losing them, or even just finding the time to keep friendships going.

If you’ve gotten to a point in your life where you’re wondering, Where did all my friends go?, you’re not alone. Perhaps you feel like you have no friends. Or, you’re in different phases of life than the people you were once close with. Maybe you find yourself getting caught up in drama, waiting for someone else to reach out, or feeling unsure about where you stand. Or you feel like everybody else’s life is a big party that you’re missing out on. You want better friendships; you just don’t know where to find them.

I’ve struggled with this too.

In this section, we are going to tackle adult friendship, which up until now, you’ve approached the same way you did as a kid: You just expected it to happen. Because of this, your friendships aren’t what they could be.

The truth is, friendships change dramatically when you become an adult—and no one sees the change coming. That’s why you need to use the Let Them Theory to take control of this area of your life.

Friendship is one of the best and most meaningful aspects of the human experience. You deserve to have amazing friendships in your life. Friends are awesome—they make your life more fun and fulfilling, and they can become the family you’ve chosen for yourself.





The Great Scattering


The reason why it is hard to navigate adult friendship is that when you reach your 20s, friendship changes from a group sport to an individual one—and no one understands this.

When you don’t recognize that this change happened (and no one does), you don’t change your approach to adult friendship, which is why you end up feeling lonely. You’ll also find it challenging to stay connected to the people that you do love in an increasingly busy and distracted world.

As you grow and change and move jobs and cities and fall in and out of love, you’ll constantly be confronted with the challenge of “finding your people” in new places and in new chapters of your life.

The Let Them Theory will help you understand adult friendship at a deeper level and it will empower you to strengthen existing friendships and set you up to meet your most favorite people in life, many of whom you haven’t even met yet.

So what changes?

Let’s talk about the difference between friendship when you were a kid and friendship after the massive change that happens when you’re an adult.

When you were little, you and your friends and your classmates felt like a team, moving through life at the exact same pace, and in the exact same place. From kindergarten to high school, you and your friends had the same daily routine, you rode the same buses, you read the same books, and learned the same subjects in school.

You saw everyone your age all the time: in class, in the halls, on the sports fields, and in your neighborhood. You also had the same milestones. From birthdays, to graduations, to the exact same vacation schedule, you participated in the same clubs, activities, sports, and classes—which made you feel subconsciously like there was a big group of people moving through life with you, and you were a part of it.

This is why it felt like friendship was a group sport. Why? Because everyone traveled in groups, and that is simply what you did when you were younger.

For the first 20 years of your life, the structure of friendship was planned for you, by your parents, the school system, sports teams, college dormitories, fraternities and sororities, or extracurricular activities that made it easy for you to be around people your same age, going through very similar experiences at the exact same time.

Therefore it was not only easy to make friends but you were spending so much time together, and sharing so many experiences, that you also had everything in place to create really deep friendships.

And the reason why it was more of a group sport was that if you were part of a team, or a friend group, or a club, you expected to be invited whenever something was planned.

Your childhood trained you to believe you’d always be invited, friendship would be easy, that you’d see your friends all the time—and something fun would always be going on.

And then BOOM. You enter your 20s, and into a phase of friendship I call the Great Scattering.

The Great Scattering looks like this: High school or college ends, and all friends scatter in different directions. Suddenly, everyone is living in different places, and very soon, all your friends are on different timelines, working different jobs, hanging out with different people, and achieving milestones at different paces. And the structure that supported all your friendships is gone.

That’s why you feel a tremendous loss of control about every aspect of your life. There is no longer a track, a template, a timeline, or milestones for what to do next or when you’re supposed to achieve it. It’s all up to you.

In other words, your adult life begins. For the first time in your life, you are officially on your own. It is entirely up to you to choose how you want to spend your time, where you want to work, what city you want to live in, and who you are going to hang out with.

And as time passes, those close friends of yours that moved to a different city start to feel further and further away. No one has any free time. Trying to coordinate everyone’s calendars to get together feels impossible. And what is holding the friend group together is a text chain that gets quieter and quieter over time. Naturally, everyone is concentrating on living their lives and focused on the people right in front of them.

And this is when that loneliness really hits. This is when adult friendship gets hard. The structure that created the opportunity to see your friends 24/7, and the expectations that you would, is gone. Then you start to wonder, Where did all my friends go? You may feel out of control. And you cling. And feel insecure. And grip harder.

The reality is adult friendships come and go. Expecting friendship will destroy it. You need a more flexible and proactive approach. Which is why you’re going to find yourself saying Let Them all the time.

Let Them move away. Let Them prioritize their new friends. Let Them not have time for me. Let Them not text me. Let Them not include me. Let Them go to brunch without me.

It happens to all of us, but it can still be incredibly confusing and disorienting. Now and forever onward, it’s up to you to change the way you think about and approach friendship as an adult—because the Great Scattering has already happened, and versions of this will continue to happen over and over as you age.

When your single friends get married, they scatter. When your friends start having kids, they scatter. When people move out of the city and into the suburbs, they scatter. When people become empty nesters or get divorced, they scatter. When people get older, or downsize, or retire, or go through a loss, they scatter.

It’s going to happen again and again in your life and with your friends. This is normal. This is why you need the Let Them Theory. It will teach you how to be more flexible in your approach to friendship, and show you how to use your time wisely to create some of the best friendships of your entire life.





The Three Pillars of Friendship


There are three factors that I believe make great friendships possible: proximity, timing, and energy. These pillars are the invisible foundation every friendship is built on.

When friends drift away, fall apart, or lose touch, it is because one or more of these three essential pillars is missing. Most of the time adult friendships fade not for personal reasons, but because of these three pillars: proximity, timing, and energy.

Understanding the role these three factors play will help you use the Let Them Theory to be more flexible, understanding, and proactive in your adult friendships.





The first pillar of friendship is proximity.


Proximity means how often you are physically near them. This matters because when you are physically near someone, you naturally spend a lot more time together. If you don’t live near each other, you are not going to see each other as often. It will require more effort to stay connected.

You can absolutely do it, but it is harder. It is easier to grow closer to people you see all the time. And this isn’t just common sense. It’s a fact.

This concept of proximity has been researched and proven to impact who you become friends with, and who you don’t. And the reason why this matters so much is that the more times you see someone in person, the more opportunities you have to get to know them, to spend time with them, to share experiences together, and to click and form a deeper friendship.

According to a University of Kansas study, to become a “casual” friend, you have to spend 74 hours with someone. And to become a “close” friend, you have to spend over 200 hours with someone. Let’s put this research in the context of friendships when you are younger, and how they change when you become an adult.

In high school, you clocked 200 hours with friends every five to six weeks. In college, you spent even more time with your friends because you lived with them. You ate every meal with them. You spent every weekend with them. This proximity allowed you the time to fortify your connections and share infinite experiences and memories that allowed you to build trust in your relationships.

If you’re physically next to someone, whether you’re living across the street, or in the dorm, or across the hall, or sitting at the desk or the cubicle next to them, or seeing them every weekend at your kid’s soccer game, you naturally spend time together because of proximity.

This matters. And it matters a lot. It also explains why it was much easier to create friends when you were younger. You were physically next to people your age all the time. This also explains why as an adult, when everyone scatters and is suddenly on a different schedule, it is hard to make new friends—because getting 200 hours with someone is a lot of time.

And get this: When you’re an adult, you don’t have as much free time as you did when you were younger to hang out, because you’re working. According to the American Time Study, scientists found that from the age of 21 through 60, you will spend more time with your co-workers than your family and friends combined.

Which means your only chance to hang out with your friends is after work or on the weekends. Think of how many coffee dates, walks, and barbecues it takes to get 200 hours with a new adult friend! And it also makes you wonder, if proximity is so important, why are you not automatically best friends with all of your co-workers, since that is who you spend most of your time with?





The second pillar of friendship is timing.


Timing refers to the chapter of life you are in right now. If you’re not in the same chapter of life with someone else, it’s much harder to relate because you have less in common.

And nowhere is the impact of timing more evident than how it impacts friendships with co-workers. As you just learned, from the ages of 21 to 60, you will spend more time with your co-workers than your friends and family combined, but here’s the catch: Everyone at work is in a different chapter of their life. That means for over four decades of your life, the majority of people at work who you spend the most physical time with are not in the same period of their life as you are.

For example, if everyone you work with is forty years older than you, it can be hard to relate. One of my daughters would always share that she would be on these team meetings at work and the “break the ice” question of the day would be something like “Where did you get married?” or “What is your retirement plan?”

She felt like she had to lie about her life every Monday morning when everyone was sharing what they did with their kids over the weekend, while she had gotten drunk with her girlfriends and thrown up in a garbage can.

This is why the timing of all life matters. Because despite spending so much time with her co-workers, and being really friendly with them, and liking a lot of them, they were in very different stages of life. It’s why they never hung out on the weekends and they never went out to dinner after work—they had nothing in common other than work.

I can give you another example of how timing impacts friendship. Chris and I have family friends that we both love. I think they are so cool. I love hanging out with them. But we are fifteen years younger and they are grandparents. We have a lot less to talk about because we are in very different stages of our lives.

Are we still friends? Of course! I love them to death! But that friendship can only go so deep because we don’t live near them, we don’t see them a lot, and the timing is off—we are in very different stages of life. And what I love about understanding these three pillars of friendship is that it makes you realize that none of this is personal.

Friendships come and go. You can feel close and then you can feel distant. And none of this is personal. It’s proximity and timing.

The Let Them Theory has really helped me loosen my grip on adult friendship. It will help you do the same, because the more you grow in your life, the more people will come in and out of your life. Let Them.

When you stop expecting to have everyone be your best friend, or to be invited to everything, or be included in everything, or that you will click with everyone, friendship gets a lot easier. There is an entirely different way to view adult friendship using the Let Them Theory; and it will make your life so much more fulfilling, healthy, and happy.





The third pillar of friendship is energy.


You either click with some people or you don’t. You can’t explain it, and neither can they, but you have to trust it. The energy is either on or it’s off. There is no scientific reason to explain it. You just have to trust it.

And here is another hard truth: Energy shifts over time. Sometimes for the worse, and sometimes for the better. And that’s a good thing, because it means that you and the people in your life are growing into new versions of yourselves.

For example, maybe you lived with five friends during college, and you loved them, and you clicked, and it was the best experience of your life. Then, two of you move in together after you graduate, and within four months, something just feels off. This is normal. It means you’re both growing and changing, and it doesn’t mean the friendship is over.

The mistake that we make is that we start to obsess over what is wrong, instead of just focusing on acceptance, kindness, and admiration for the other person. Just because you were best friends during one stage of your life doesn’t mean you will be best friends during the next stage.

In fact, while we’re on the topic, I hate the term best friend. It puts too much pressure and expectations on a relationship that will always need room to grow and evolve. As people come in and out of your life, Let Them. Trust the timing.

There are certain people who are meant to be in your life for a season. There are people that are meant to be in your life for a specific reason. And there will be people who will be with you for a lifetime.

This is normal. And when someone drifts away, or the energy feels off, do not make them your enemy. You can tell when a friendship is forced, and the energy is changing, because it starts to drain you. Conversations feel awkward. You’ll start to feel like something is off or conversations are forced. Trust that feeling. I learned the hard way that gripping on to something, and trying to force it, just makes things worse.

We tend to hold on to things that we know deep down are not meant for us, because we know the second we stop forcing it, the relationship will fade. That is exactly what happened to me. All of a sudden, I found myself on the outside of what I thought was my closest friend group. I didn’t know what to do, and I definitely did not handle it well.





CHAPTER 12



Why Some Friendships Naturally Fade

Here’s what happened.

One of the most fun times in my life was when I was a young mom of three. We lived in a neighborhood with a huge group of friends, and were all raising our kids together, hanging out with each other, and building a really incredible community.

We all had kids the same age who went to the same public elementary school. It was one of the most social and fun periods of my life, because we were bumping into our friends all the time because of the kids, school, and their schedules overlapping. I honestly felt like I was back in high school again with constant plans, invitations, and groups of people to hang out with.

There were two couples in particular that we grew very close to, and we did tons of things together with our kids—going away for the weekend, Halloween trick-or-treating, coaching Saturday morning town soccer, Sunday brunches, football parties, barbecuing all the time, you name it.

Chris and I were genuinely happy. It felt like pure luck that we had moved into a suburban town not knowing anyone, and truly struck gold because we met so many amazing couples who we loved spending time with—and our kids loved their kids too! It was too good to be true.

At the same time, one of our closest friends was living in a different state and always remarked on how jealous they were of our community and our large, fun circle of friends. We thought that the only way things could get better was if they moved with their kids to our town too.

So Chris and I started encouraging them: “You’ve got to move here!”

And so they did. In fact, they bought a house right across the street from the two couples that we did everything with. At first, I was SO excited. Imagine this—one of your closest friends not only moves to your town, but lives on the same street, and is becoming neighbors, with your current two best family friends! We lived a five-minute drive away—it was perfect!

So naturally, I expected it was going to be one big block party: All four families together all the time. Now, in the beginning, it was just as I’d hoped. They’d call us and invite us to drive over and join in on the random weeknight dinners. But then over time, something really unexpected started to happen. The invitations became fewer and fewer. And what became apparent was that the three families were hanging out without us. . . all the time.

Looking back, I now understand that of course they would be. Proximity matters. They lived across the street from one another. They could wave to each other from their front doors. They all had kids the same age who took the bus together and carpooled to sports together every single day.

And looking back on this, I get it. It wasn’t personal at all. When you’re standing next to somebody waiting for your kids to get off the bus, you naturally turn and ask, “What are you guys doing tonight? Want to come over for dinner?”

It makes total sense that they would all become best friends! And they are allowed to! But for me, my experience was watching this Atlanta couple ultimately and unapologetically take what I thought was our place in the friend group. And I didn’t handle it well.





I Was Horrible


I did what most people do when they feel threatened or excluded, because I didn’t understand adult friendship. I found myself consumed with jealousy and anger. That used to be us, I thought. They stole our friend group. And as soon as my energy shifted toward them, everything changed.

At first, I wanted to be fun, friendly, and carefree around them, so the situation would change back to the way it was. But whenever I thought about the situation, or saw them, it was as if a demon took over my mind, body, and spirit.

I could not control my feelings. I was cold and bitter. My energy was off, and everyone could feel it. Chris could feel it. The three couples could feel it. And even friends in the wider group of families could feel it too. I was a complete bitch, even though I didn’t want to be. I tried to not think about it, but any given weeknight, while we were at home eating spaghetti at the dining room table, our friends were all together grilling out in the backyard. It burned me up inside.

I’m embarrassed about how I felt and acted and how petty and insecure I was. But at this point in my life, I didn’t understand my emotions or how to manage them. I didn’t have the Let Them Theory. I became a walking friendship red flag.

If I saw any of the six of them at a Saturday morning soccer game, a school meeting, or a cocktail party, or the grocery store, I would feel so stressed. I wanted to be normal. I liked these people and wanted things to change. But I had no idea how to deal with my feelings.

I couldn’t control myself. My tone of voice would shift. My arms would cross. And, while I didn’t want to feel the way that I did, I had no idea how to change it. I don’t think anyone purposefully excluded me or Chris.

And now, when I reflect back, I can see the situation for what it was. I can see how angry and jealous I was. I wouldn’t want me at a barbecue either. I wouldn’t want my negative energy there. It’s a miracle we got invited anywhere at that point in my life!

My poor husband. It didn’t bother him that the dynamic in the friend group had changed. He didn’t take anything personally. But I just couldn’t change how I felt. It’s still deeply painful and personal to talk about even now, and I take full responsibility for my lack of maturity and toxic behavior. I was acting like a child. One minute I was pouting, the next minute I was pretending like I didn’t care, and oftentimes in private, I was throwing a tantrum in front of poor Chris.

If I had had the Let Them Theory back then, I would have been able to Let Them be friends. I would have been able to rise above the situation. I would have taken responsibility for understanding and processing my emotions in a healthy way, like a mature adult. But at the time, I had no idea how to deal with my emotions or what I was feeling. It all felt like a personal attack. They became the villain in my story.

Why? I’ll tell you: It’s easier to blame someone else, and sit in your anger, than it is to take responsibility for yourself. I was making the single biggest mistake that you make in adult friendships: I was expecting to be friends forever, expecting to be included, and expecting it to be easy.

This story illustrates that proximity really does play a massive role in forming and maintaining adult friendships, and that is not always in your control. The story also illustrates how energy can destroy a friendship, and that is in your control. This situation happened when I was in my late 30s and early 40s, but it can happen in any stage of your life. At some point, you’re going go from being on the inside of a friend group to feeling like you’re on the outside. This is normal.

Because as people come and go, and scatter in different directions, and change their lives, and grow into who they are meant to become, every single one of the three pillars of friendship changes: proximity, timing, and energy. And that is why adult friendships require flexibility. That’s why it’s usually not personal when people come in and out of your life.

Let Them.





“I’ve Let Them. But Now I Have No Friends.”


In researching this book, and analyzing the experiences of thousands of people around the world who have been using the theory, one of the most difficult experiences people have is concluding that the people you think are your friends are not your friends at all.

As you say Let Them, people will reveal exactly who they are, and they reveal where you stand in their life. You’ll find yourself using the Let Them Theory a lot with your friends, and you will start to see many relationships where the effort you’ve been putting in is one-sided.

You’re the one who calls, and when you stop calling, no call comes back. You’re the one who always reaches out and makes all the plans, and when you stop making the plans, suddenly no one is reaching out and inviting you. It is painful to see the truth that you’re the one putting in the effort. When that happens, and it will, I want you to come back to the three pillars of friendship: proximity, timing, and energy.

When a friendship fades, or someone reveals who they are, one of those three pillars is off. Maybe more. Before you feel sorry for yourself, and start isolating, or getting angry, look at the facts.

Have you or your friend changed or grown in new ways? Have the patterns and schedules of your lives changed? Are you physically bumping into them as much as you used to? Do you feel like the timing of your life is still the same, or are you in different chapters? Has some major change happened in one of your lives that has shifted the energy between you?

Asking yourself these questions is really important, because we tend to default to making ourselves wrong, or blame the other person and then decide the friendship is over.

Before you walk away from a friendship, assume good intent on the other person’s part. Sometimes, you’re just friends with someone who never makes plans, or is extremely introverted, or who has a lot of heavy or demanding things going on in their life. It’s not that they are ghosting you; it’s that they are exhausted by the chapter of life they are in. It’s not personal that they’ve become distant. And the fact that you still reach out may be the lifeline that they need.

In doing the research for this book, I noticed a lot of comments from people specifically upset that their friends are not texting them back. I do not want you to use the theory to blow up your friendships because someone is not responding as often as you want them to.

Friendships are not a tit for tat. Do not keep score. Reach out to people because you want to. But don’t expect a response. How quickly or how often someone responds is not a sign of how much they care about you. It’s more likely an indication of how overwhelmed they may be. Everyone has a ton going on, and 99 percent of the time you have no clue what someone else is dealing with, so with friends especially, don’t judge when you don’t hear back, assume good intent.





Let Them Not Text Back


I can share personally that these last four years of my life have been the most overwhelming and demanding years ever, and it has had a huge impact on my friendships. After living right outside of Boston for 26 years, we moved to a small, rural town in a different state where I didn’t know anyone my age.

At the same time, my company was going through a period of hyper growth, and I have never managed anything in business like this. My number one commitment has been spending time with my family and getting settled into our new community. So, any free time I have, I have poured into family and trying to make new friends in this small town.

I am sure there are many of my old friends who believe that I have ghosted them, or neglected the relationships, or thought that I’m a bad friend. And from their point of view, they are right.

It’s not that I don’t care. It’s that I’ve been focusing my time and energy on different priorities these past three years, and have not made it a priority to proactively reach out to my old group of friends on a consistent basis. And that’s okay.

When somebody “loses touch,” it doesn’t mean you’ve lost a friend. I hate the fact that a lot of people think that just because someone is distant, they are now your enemy. Let Them be distant. Just because they are not in front of your face doesn’t mean you’re against them. Make it a habit to just cheer for people and wish them the best.

I have found with some of my friendships that people will “disappear” for a few years and it turns out they were caring for an aging parent, or a child who was struggling, or were consumed by an unhealthy relationship, or a really demanding career. It had nothing to do with you. They are still your friend.

I say this, because I do not want you using the theory to make assumptions and to blow up perfectly amazing relationships because you haven’t been flexible and allowed people to come in and out of your life, based on what is going on in your life and in theirs. All it takes is one text or phone call, and oftentimes, you’re right back in it.

As I come out of these crazy busy four years, and I am now settled in our new house, and our Boston studios are up and running, and I’ve spent a lot more time with my aging parents, and we are now empty nesters, a new chapter has begun. And in this one, reprioritizing friendships is at the top of the list.

If you’ve ever received a call or text from someone you’ve lost touch with, it’s one of the greatest surprises in the world. And there are people in my life that I haven’t spoken to in several years, that if I had coffee with them, we would fall right back into a deep and loving connection. And I’m excited to create that for myself. Let Me.

The connection you have with another person never actually breaks. It’s just the proximity and timing that makes you lose touch with them. So, it’s never too late to reconnect with old friends and this is completely in your control.

Let Them will help you be flexible, be compassionate, and allow people to come and go. Let Me will remind you to stop sitting around expecting invitations, or assuming ill intent. It will motivate you to take the lead on reaching out to old friends, and put yourself out there to create new ones.

The Let Them Theory will help you find your people, even if you are starting from scratch. When you use it, you will create some of the most amazing friendships of your life. In fact, you’ll soon see that you haven’t even met some of your favorite people yet. Isn’t that exciting, to live your life knowing that there are so many incredible people and connections and experiences, just waiting for you to be the one to go first and say hello?

So let’s use the theory to go find them. I just did this at the age of 54 when we moved to a new community. I’m going to tell you the whole story and you and I are going to really focus on the Let Me part of friendship.





CHAPTER 13



How to Create the Best Friendships of Your Life

When we moved to our new town, I felt so lonely. I was brand-new to the area. I knew no one my age. And I was miserable.

At some point in your life you are going to experience this exact same thing. Every life change creates changes in your friendships. You’ll experience it if you go through a breakup or divorce and people pick sides. You’ll experience it if you or a loved one go through a major struggle and people either have no idea how to support you or are uncomfortable, so they distance themselves. You’ll experience this when you have to move for your career or education.

And even if you’re super excited about the change—you’re going to your dream school or moving to your dream city—the reality is that, when you get there, you’ll have no friends. The first time you may have experienced this in your life was when you went to college. You get to college and you expect to meet all your best friends right away, and that is not what happens. Everyone is nervous and latches onto the first person they meet and they try to form a group.

Within a week, it feels like everyone is already in a friend group. But, if you think about your college or even high school friend group, by the time you graduated your friend group changed a lot. That’s because it takes time to find your people.





Give It A Year


When my daughter went to college, she called me crying all the time, saying, “I’m at the wrong school. My people are not here. I think I need to transfer.” And I constantly told her to hang up the phone, go to the cafeteria, and ask to sit with someone who looked interesting. “You have to put yourself out there, and most importantly, you must give it a year.”

She hated that advice. She called me all yearlong. She felt so lonely and desperate. And the two friends she had made early on felt the exact same way. (Hi Lexi and Micaela!) To their credit, they all kept putting themselves out there their entire first year.

I know my daughter, Sawyer, was asking to sit with people, DMing people online to get lunch, she joined a million clubs, tried out for the club lacrosse team (got cut), went to events on campus, but nothing clicked. It really took her a full year of trying. And then, in the last few weeks of school, she met one of her now closest friends, Mary Margaret, who then introduced her (and her two friends) to seven other girls who to this day are her people. She really had to give it a year.

And when I moved, somehow I forgot my own advice. I needed to be reminded it would take a year of trying. Within a week of moving, I was convinced that I had made a huge mistake. I felt bad for myself for an entire year. I cried all the time. And I was convinced I would never find a person that I would connect with or relate to. But what was I doing during that first year?

Nothing. Sitting in my house, feeling lonely.

I was not putting myself out there at all. I was not looking for opportunities to connect. I played sad music and felt bad for myself. I cried and complained to my husband. I was closed off. And I made the mistake of expecting friendship to fall out of the sky and land in my lap. It doesn’t work like that.

I'm sure you've had an experience like this too. Maybe you moved, or changed jobs, or went through a breakup, or took care of a family member who was struggling, or became an empty nester and felt like you were starting over. In those moments, I'm sure you felt pretty lonely. This is normal.

And even if you have great friends who are far away, you feel alone if you don’t have any friends near you. It got so bad for me that I was on a walk one day with my two adult daughters, sobbing about how I had no friends, and how I hated where we lived.

We passed by the house of a woman I had met once six months prior, and I mentioned to my daughters that I had met the woman who lived in the house and she seemed like she could be cool. And my daughters forced me to walk up her driveway, right then, and knock on her door and say hello.

I didn’t feel like it. I was really scared to walk up the driveway. I felt like a loser. Has it really come to this?!

Yes, it had. When I really think about it, this was the exact same thing I told my daughter Sawyer to do when she called me crying freshman year of college.

It was embarrassing to knock on her door. I could feel my heart racing as I heard the dogs barking and footsteps coming. And when the door swung open, it wasn’t the woman I had met; it was her husband.

I asked, “Is Mia here?” And then blurted out, “I met her a while ago, I’m brand-new, I’m really lonely, I thought I would stop and say hello. . .” My daughters chimed in, “Our mom needs friends. She thought your wife was cool, and so we made her come say hello.”

He was so gracious, invited us in, gave us a tour of the house. We met the dogs, Mia was thrilled we stopped by, we exchanged numbers, and one week later, she and I were walking that very same loop together. And that was the beginning of turning this part of my life around and learning that adult friendship isn’t something that happens. It’s something you create.

I am happy to report, from that painful knock on Mia’s door, and a hundred other awkward little moments—introducing myself to someone at a coffee shop, pulling into a field at a local flower farm to tell the owners that their flowers were incredible, saying hello to the person next to me at an exercise class—I was able to slowly but surely create my own new little community.

Over the course of the year, I started feeling like I not only knew the familiar faces in my small community, but by getting to know them, I found my people. This is why you need to focus on Let Me.





The Habit of “Going First”


Let Me be the first to introduce myself. Let Me be the first to say, “I’m new here. How long have you lived here?” Let Me be the first to say, “If you ever want to go for a walk, let me know. Here is my number.”

Slowly but surely, one awkward conversation at a time, I not only met my people—I found some of my most favorite people I’ve ever met in my life in this small rural town. And if I can make amazing friends in my 50s, you can make amazing friends too, wherever you live, at whatever age you are.

It’s never too late because everyone wants and needs friendship in their life. Even if people already have their “friend group,” there is always room for someone you truly click with.

All you have to do is go first.

Be the one to say hi to whoever is around you. It makes all the difference. I didn’t do that for a long time. For the year that I sat in my house crying, even when I went out, I was closed off. I would walk into a coffee shop, see the same people, and I knew no one’s name. Because I didn’t ask. That’s why I didn’t know anybody. I kept to myself. I didn’t talk to anyone.

The second I started “going first,” I walked into the same coffee shop that I had most days for an entire year, and as the cashier rang me up, I said, “I’m Mel. What’s your name?”

“Kevin.”

When he handed me the coffee, I said “Thanks, Kevin.”

So when I sat down with my coffee, I immediately opened up my phone and created a new contact file for the coffee shop. In the notes section, I added “Kevin the tall barista with a beard.” I did it right away because I was afraid I would forget his name if I waited until I got into the car.

Next I turned to the young couple who I had seen morning after morning at the coffee shop, but never spoken to before. “Hey guys, I see you here a lot; I just moved to the area. I wanted to introduce myself. I’m Mel, what’s your name?”

Gregory and Jordan. Couldn’t have been nicer. I immediately put their names in my coffee shop contact, under Kevin’s name, in the notes section, with a short description: “Cute married couple. Moved from Los Angeles. Baby is adorable.” Then I asked them how long they lived in the area. Turns out they had just moved here a year ago too.

Next I asked them what they did. You want to know something crazy? Gregory works in the podcast business. Jordan is a psychologist. What are the odds? And to think I spent a year sitting ten feet away from two people who I had so much in common with. What I was doing in the coffee shop goes way deeper than making small talk. I was starting to create a community for myself.

The warmth you offer others always finds its way back to you. Simply knowing all the names of the familiar faces around you will make you feel more connected to where you live. Plus, the more people you meet, the faster you will find the people you truly connect with.

And there are even more benefits to this. By going first, you create a connection that has a huge impact on your well being and happiness. And it is often overlooked. Researchers say the kinds of people you sit next to at the coffee shop, or stand next to in the elevator in your building, are not strangers—they are “weak ties.”

These people are superpowerful and an important part of your life. They can become a foundation you build that lifts you up in your day-to-day routine. Learn their names. Say hello. Pet their dogs. Put descriptions in your contacts so that you can refresh your memory before you walk into the coffee shop tomorrow.

One conversation at a time, I started creating my social scaffolding, this network of people around me that I knew by first name: “Hi Kevin,” “Hi Gregory,” “Hi Jordan,” which made me feel a little less lonely.

It’s also how I met one of my now closest friends, David. We were living a mile away from each other for a year, and we never met because we were both sitting alone in our houses feeling sorry for ourselves. We started as a hello in a coffee shop, and now he is one of my most favorite people in the entire world, and he and his husband have become like family.

If I can do it, so can you. The Let Them Theory is going to help you take this on.

Will some people be a little awkward? Yes. Let Them. Will most people be warm and receptive? Yes. Let Them.

Creating friendship really is about the Let Me part. And here are some simple things I did to make myself go first:





1. Compliment people everywhere you go.


If you love their nail color, tell them. If you love their outfit, tell them. If you like their socks, say it! People love to be complimented because they feel seen and appreciated. And it’s a foolproof way to break the ice with someone without feeling weird.





2. Be curious.


Ask them what they’re reading. Ask them what they ordered. People love to talk about themselves. And even if it doesn’t go any further than the other person saying thank you, you get points for being the one who goes first.





3. Smile and say hello to anyone and everyone you pass or meet.


Being a warm and approachable person is a skill. If you practice it, it becomes a way of life. When you move through life with a welcoming spirit, life opens up to you





4. Do this without expectation.


The reason to be warm to strangers is because simply creating connections with other people will improve your life. The warmth you give to others always finds its way back to you.

Trust that the more you do this without expecting someone to invite you out to dinner, or someone to immediately click, the faster the right people find their way to you. You can think about it in terms of energy. You are opening up your energy, knowing that the people that are truly meant to be in your life are going to match it naturally.

Loneliness is real. But you’re not stuck there. It’s hard to put yourself out there, but it’s harder to stay in your house and feel lonely. I’d rather have an awkward moment than continue to feel lonely. And I know you would too.

And finally, give it a year.

Building a network of warm connections that make you feel like you are part of a community is a vital layer of friendship as an adult. It was shocking to me how simply starting to connect with all these people who were all around me made me realize that I was the one who was disconnected from the potential of friendship.





Creating Community Anywhere


I was the one who kept myself from connecting with the community that was right there around me. By isolating and separating myself, I had closed myself off to the community that was waiting for me. Your soulmate or favorite friend could very well be sitting two tables away from you at the coffee shop today.

Don’t expect them to find you. Go first and you’ll find them. And if you really want to accelerate your ability to meet people that you’re going to click with, try these things that my husband and I did:





1. Look for events and group classes that interest you.


It could be anything: CrossFit, yoga, running, walking, cooking, painting, improv, or furniture refinishing. This will put you in proximity with people that have a similar interest in a particular topic. This will make it more likely for you to find people that you have things in common with.





2. When you click with someone, take it out of the class.


You go first, and ask them to grab a cup of coffee or take a walk. The more people you do this with, the more comfortable you will feel inviting someone you have just met to do things and the faster you will find your people.





3. As you meet more people, look for events that are interesting and reach out to the people you’ve been hanging out with to see if anyone wants to go as a group.


Maybe it’s a concert, or a lecture, or a volunteer day. One way I did this was creating a walking group with one woman I met at a hair salon. Then she brought a friend one day. Slowly but surely I started inviting other people I had met. Every Wednesday, we meet at 6:30 a.m. to walk a particular loop in the neighborhood.

Three years later, it’s still going strong. The text chain has so many people on it, we can’t add any more. And new people keep showing up all the time. This is another example of why it takes an entire year.

But walking is just one example. I have invited groups of people to meet up and listen to jazz at a local inn, to go to a wreath-making class, to go to a drag queen bingo event, and to volunteer to help a local farmer dig up dahlia bulbs.

My husband, Chris, also used this approach. He joined a gym, signed up for a golf league, and took a bunch of paddle tennis clinics. He got involved at the local ski mountain. He became a hospice volunteer. All of these things led him to meet people with similar interests.

Chris then looked for fun things happening in town or nearby and invited a new friend to do it with him. He joined a team to compete in a men’s ski race. He started a Tuesday-morning sunrise “climb the mountain and then ski down” group—they meet in a parking lot, the word has spread, and now on any given Tuesday you’ll see 15–20 people of all ages, and from surrounding towns, hiking up the mountain together.

What does that tell you?

That slowly but surely you can make more friends—and that every single one of us is looking for opportunities to connect with other people and find new friends.

Instead of sitting around hoping that someone else starts a hiking group, or a walking club, or a book club, you go first.

Using the Let Them Theory, you’ll not only make better friendships—you’ll be a better friend too. This matters. Your relationships create a good life. Good friends make you happier, healthier, and bring your life meaning; and friendships are one of the things you’ll cherish most as you go through your life.

The Let Them Theory will help you create the friendships you deserve, which are going to require you to be flexible. Remember, friends are going to come and go in your life. Stop expecting the invitation. Stop gripping so tightly when things start to shift. And start taking responsibility for how you show up. Let Them will help you be more flexible, not take things personally, and allow the right people to come in, and let the wrong people to leave.

It will also help you navigate this very awkward period where you are making new friends. If you say hello at a coffee shop and they aren’t very friendly, Let Them. If their calendar is so busy they can’t find time to go for a walk, Let Them. If they cancel plans this weekend because they’ve had a long week at work, Let Them. If they fall in love, or have a baby, and you are no longer a priority, Let Them. If they move away, and start a different chapter, Let Them. If they stop returning your calls, Let Them. If they are prioritizing other friendships or work, Let Them. If the timing, proximity, or energy is off, Let Them.

People are going to come and go in your life. And the more flexible you are, the more they do. It’s such a beautiful thing to Let Them. Focus on Let Me, because that is what’s in your control.

Let Me be understanding. Let Me make an effort. Let Me check in without an expectation, but just because I care. Let Me make the plans. Let Me trust when the energy feels off. Let Me call or text if someone crosses my mind. Let Me act with the belief that some of my most favorite friends I haven’t met yet.

Let Me go first.

So let’s summarize how to master adult friendship. You have been approaching adult friendship the same way you did as a kid—you just expected it to happen. The Let Them Theory empowers you to stop expecting friendship to happen and to take responsibility for creating it.

Problem: The Great Scattering happened and you didn’t realize it. You have been approaching friendship the wrong way ever since. You have expected to be included. You have expected to be around your friends all the time. You have expected the text back. That expectation has led to feelings of disconnection, isolation, and uncertainty in approaching new or existing friendships.

Truth: There are three pillars to adult friendship: proximity, timing, and energy. It’s your responsibility to understand these three pillars and adopt a flexible mentality and proactive approach to your friendships. You have so much power in your relationships and some of your most favorite people are just waiting for you to go first.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, start creating connections without any expectations. You go first. Start saying hello to people around you and building that feeling of community wherever you live today. Sign up for that class. Create the book club. Send the text. One awkward conversation at a time, you will find your people. This approach empowers you to create the most incredible community around you, filled with friendships that are meaningful, supportive, and aligned with who you are.



When you say Let Them, you release the need to cling to friendships that no longer serve you, making space for connections that truly matter. When you say Let Me, you take charge of your social life, reaching out, initiating, and cultivating the kind of friendships that reflect your values and bring you happiness.

It’s time to stop waiting and start creating—building the best friendships of your life and surrounding yourself with a community that uplifts and supports you. You have so many laughs, memories to make, and incredible adventures in your future.

It’s all there waiting for you to reach out and create it.

All you have to do is go first.





Motivating Other

People to Change





CHAPTER 14



People Only Change When They Feel Like It

One of the most common questions that has been asked over the years is: “How do I motivate someone else to change?”

You can’t.

The reality is, people only change when they feel like changing. It doesn’t matter how much you want someone to change. It doesn’t matter how valid your reasons are. Or that you are right in your opinion that they should change. Or how big the consequences are if they don’t change. If someone doesn’t feel like changing, they won’t. And worse, when you pressure someone to change it just creates more tension, resentment, and distance in your relationships. I’ll prove it to you.

I want you to think about someone in your life whom you care about and you wish would change. It could be anyone: your mom, your niece, your roommate, your brother, your husband, your ex, your kids, your sister-in-law, your best friend, your partner. Anyone.

You wish they would get a better job, lose weight, be more motivated, wake up earlier, stick to a budget, pick up after themselves, stop dating losers, be more proactive, drink less, help take care of the dog, stop being so negative, change their views on politics, be more appreciative, stop smoking, be more involved with their kids, or stop leaving their dishes in the sink.

You may worry about them. You may not understand why they don’t see that this is an issue or why they aren’t motivated. You’ve probably thought, Why can’t they just do this thing I am asking of them?! I know exactly how you feel.

Here’s the truth: When you push someone, it only makes the person push back. You’re working against the fundamental law of human nature. People need to feel in control of their decisions. You want people in your life to change, but pressuring them creates resistance to it.

You may be acting with the best of intentions, but it is yielding the worst result. That’s because every time you fight against human nature you will lose.

Using the Let Them Theory, you’ll learn an entirely new approach to dealing with situations where you want someone else to change their behavior. It’s true: You can’t make someone else change. But I never said you couldn’t influence them.

As I share examples from my life and walk you step-by-step through how to use the Let Them Theory to influence someone else to change, I want you to keep your relationships and the people who are frustrating you in mind.





Wishing Someone Would Change


“I wish you would take better care of yourself.”

A good friend of mine is married to (and deeply in love with) a guy who needs to get healthier. Maybe you’re in this situation with someone you love too. Over the years, she’s tried everything to get her husband to take control of his health.

She’s asked, pleaded, hinted, and even occasionally broken down in tears about it in front of him. It worries her. . . a LOT.

She’s gotten angry with him and made passive-aggressive comments. She’s signed him up for gym memberships. She’s bought him new sneakers. She’s cooked the healthy dinners. And she even got them a Peloton to work out on at home.

Nothing’s worked. At this point, everything makes her mad. Whether it is his order off the menu, his resistance to working out, his post-dinner desserts, or the hours he spends watching television every night, it doesn’t matter what the poor guy does—it frustrates the hell out of her.

Now, to his credit, he’s tried. He’s started diets, he’s gone to the gym in spurts, and he’s even taken some Peloton classes—but nothing lasts, and so he and his wife remain in this deadlock with each other about his health.

She’s mad he won’t change, and he’s annoyed that she won’t stop nagging him. Sound familiar? It does to me.

And I’m sure it does to you as well, as you think about the person in your life you wish would change for the better.

I know you want the best for them. That’s why you want them to change. You love them. That’s why you’re stressed about this situation.

It’s why you want them to get healthier. Get a better job. Study harder. Go to therapy. To move on after a divorce and start dating again. Or just get out of the house and spend more time with their friends.

Wanting someone you love to change for the better, and to be happier and healthier, is normal. It’s a good thing to want someone to live a good life. It’s a beautiful thing to see a bigger possibility for someone you love. It’s an important thing to believe in someone’s ability to improve their life, reach their potential, and achieve their goals.

The issue isn’t wanting this for someone else. The issue is how you’ve been approaching this topic and how it’s impacting the dynamic between you and the person you care about.

Or maybe as you’re reading this, you’re realizing that someone has been pressuring YOU to change. They don’t even need to say something to you about your job, or your habits, or who you are dating, because their behavior makes it very clear that they don’t accept you as you are right now.

They want you to be living your life in a different way. It’s annoying. I know it is. And your natural inclination is to push back.

The Let Them Theory has challenged me to think a lot about this knee-jerk reaction to pressure people (and their innate reaction to resist), and why it’s hard for anyone to change.





Why Is Change So Hard?


I mean, when you want someone else to change, don’t you just kind of assume that it would be easy for them to. . . just do it?

I’ve definitely been there. All you have to do is just point out the obvious, right? Just tell the person how much better they will feel if they work out. Or constantly remind them of their ability to get a better job and how a better salary is going to solve all their current financial issues. Or the fact that they aren’t going to meet someone amazing sitting on the couch all weekend playing video games.

I mean, clearly they’ve never considered these options for themselves. Right?

Now, flip that around. How many times has someone pointed out the obvious to you? As if you didn’t already know that exercising would help you lose weight. Or crying alone in your bedroom won’t win your ex back. Or that applying to nursing school is a requirement to actually get into nursing school.

It’s almost offensive when someone else does this to you. You feel attacked. And it’s also annoying when somebody sits on their high horse and acts like it would be easy to just snap your fingers and suddenly change or find a higher paying job. How dare they think they know what’s best for you!

The fact is, change is hard for everyone, including you. No one wants to feel pressure from you, because they are already feeling it from themselves.

Just take my friend and her husband. Of course he wants to get in shape! He wants to lose weight. It’s not easy to carry around an extra 50 pounds. He hates the fact that he’s the biggest one in his friend group. It’s not good for his heart. He knows this. He’s not an idiot. And he also knows how hard it’s going to be, and how much work it’s going to take.

Waking up early, cutting down on the alcohol, feeling embarrassed at the gym, starting a new diet is going to be painful. It just is. Just like it’s hard for a smoker to quit smoking. It’s hard for someone who overspends to learn to stick to a budget. It’s hard to be single, which is why people stay with someone longer than they should. It’s hard to believe in yourself and land a great job if you’ve been fired.

Change is never a cakewalk. If it were fun and easy, the person you love would already be doing it.

The most loving thing you can do is to stop pressuring them and Let Them be. Right now, you have a completely unrealistic expectation and an approach that is backfiring. You have no other choice but to Let Them. Let adults be adults.

The Let Them Theory will force you to take a step back into reality, and approach your relationships with more compassion and humility and in a much more effective way. First, you need to understand the science of motivation and change so your approach is more effective.





Truth #1: Adults only change when they feel like it.


Stop trying to motivate people. It doesn’t work. Based on the research, the motivation to change must come from within the other person.

Now, people love the word motivation—and maybe you do too. My friend complains about the fact that her spouse isn’t “motivated” to take better care of himself. And maybe you feel a little frustrated that the person you want to change isn’t motivated either.

However, it’s just not that simple. Let’s start with the definition of motivation: It means “you feel like doing something.” And, as you’re learning, adults only do what they feel like doing.

Your spouse doesn’t feel like exercising. That’s why they are not motivated! They don’t want to do it. You can’t motivate them, because the “feeling” of wanting to do it has to come from within them.

The problem with motivation is it’s never there when you need it. If motivation were automatic, everyone would have six-pack abs, a million dollars in the bank, and the world’s best side hustle. Plus, if you could magically make people “feel like doing” whatever you want them to do, you’d be practicing mind control. . . not motivation.

And look, even I mess this up.

For example, I spent years trying to “motivate” people to change the same way I got myself to change: by pushing them. I pushed my best friend to start dating again, I gifted my brother a personal trainer, I tried to force my mom to go to therapy. Giant. Fail.

Of course it failed because pushing someone just makes them push back.





Truth #2: Human beings are wired to move toward what feels good.


Another reason why pressure doesn’t work? Humans are wired to move toward what feels good right now, and to move away from what feels hard in the moment.

This is neuroscience. In researching this book, I spoke to Harvard-trained psychiatrist Dr. Alok Kanojia, MD—also known as “Dr. K” to the millions of people who follow him online at the Healthy Gamer.

Dr. K is one of the leading voices on motivation and behavior change. He told me, point blank, that pressuring other people backfires because “you don’t understand the way people are wired.”

What you need to know, according to Dr. K, is simply that a human being will always feel like choosing what is pleasurable now, and avoiding what feels painful. In the moment, the work it takes to change is painful and hard. That’s why no one is motivated to change—even when they know it’s good for them in the long run.

My friend’s husband knows it’s going to take endless trips to the gym (and a whole other assortment of lifestyle changes) to improve his health. But the couch he’s sitting on? It’s comfy right NOW. The bag of chips he’s eating? It’s delicious right NOW. The game he’s watching? It’s entertaining him right NOW.

While he knows that the treadmill and the bench press will eventually create a good result, the gratification isn’t there right NOW. In fact, the immediate thing he will feel when he pushes himself off the couch and hops on the treadmill is. . . pain.

The treadmill and the bench press are going to be tiring. They’re going to make him sore. They’re going to require a lot of work. . . and what if he can’t stick to it? What if it’s not worth it? What if the weight doesn’t come off? What if he can’t do it? Isn’t it just a better and easier idea to finish the bag of chips and try again tomorrow?

Of course it is. And that is why he isn’t motivated to change! He doesn’t do it, because he doesn’t feel like it.

Dr. K told me that when we pressure other people to change, “We are spending our whole lives swimming upstream. Instead of understanding our motivational circuitry, we are trying to conquer it. Instead of utilizing it, we’re trying to fight against it and overcome it.” When you pressure someone, you’re fighting against the wiring of the human brain. People are wired toward what feels pleasurable now. Dr. K says that in order to make a change, a person must be able to separate themselves from the pain they will feel in the moment and the action that they need to take.

That means while he is sitting on the couch, he is going to have to say to himself, “This is going to suck to exercise, but I’m going to do it anyway.”

He has to do it. He has to separate himself from the pain. He has to decide to override his feelings and push himself to do it. You can’t do that for someone else. So Let Them sit on the couch.

And that’s not all. There are even more psychological reasons why pressuring is backfiring.





Truth #3: Every single person on the planet thinks they’re the exception.


I also talked to Dr. Tali Sharot while researching this book. Dr. Sharot is a behavioral neuroscientist and the director of the Affective Brain Lab at University College London and MIT. Her research integrates neuroscience, behavioral economics, and psychology to study how emotion and behavior influence people’s beliefs and decisions.

And one of her findings is groundbreaking: that people believe that warning labels, threats, and known risks do not apply to them.

That’s why my friend’s husband thinks he’s the only person on the planet who can be overweight and sedentary and never have a heart attack. It’s why he can convince himself that he can stay exactly the same, and nothing bad will happen.

That’s why your friend thinks she’s the only person on the planet who can vape several times a day and never see repercussions on her lungs. That’s why you think “quietly quitting” your job by coming in late, leaving early, and phoning it in on effort will go completely unnoticed. That’s why your significant other doesn’t believe you when you say, “If this doesn’t change, I am leaving.”

Everyone thinks they are the exception to bad outcomes happening to them. Which explains why your tears, pleading, and ultimatums will also backfire.

Our brains quite literally tune out the worst case scenarios—which is why the contempt-filled sighs aren’t doing anything.

They think they are the exception. (And by the way, so do you, when it comes to changes you are resisting in your own life.) By being passive-aggressive, constantly bringing it up, or using threats as a way of trying to pressure someone else to change, it will always backfire.

And, get this: Dr. Sharot explained that brain scans show that when someone is telling you something negative (“I’ll leave if you don’t stop drinking”) or something you don’t want to hear (“That dude you’re dating is a narcissist”), your brain literally tunes it out.

You can see on scans that the part of the brain that is listening to negative information turns off! So what does that mean?

It means that all those threats, worst-case scenarios, passive-aggressive comments, eye rolls, and scare tactics aren’t even registering in the other person’s brain. You are wasting your time, your words, and your breath. No wonder you are so frustrated and stressed out by the situation!

That’s why you need a different approach, and the Let Them Theory will help you put this science to work so you use your time and energy in a much more effective and compassionate manner.

And if you do it right, it may just inspire the person you love to want to change for themselves.

Let’s go back to the example of my friend and her husband. I want you to picture yourself in their situation.

Say you walk in the house after a long day at work, and your spouse is there happily lying on the couch watching his basketball game and shoving chips into his mouth.

He’s fine sitting there. In fact, he’s really happy to be sitting there. He says, “Hey honey!” with a massive smile across his face.

You, though. . . you take one look at him, the stress hits, and the amygdala turns on. You’re immediately annoyed. The anger starts to bubble up inside of you. You can’t help yourself from audibly sighing, “Oh, hi.”

You’re not thinking about anything you just learned about the human brain or the science of motivation or any of the things we’ve talked about so far. You’re just thinking about how easy it would be for him to get up and do something other than sit on his lazy ass.

Since you’re coming from a place of judgment, not acceptance, you’re not thinking about all those little moves he needs to make to go to the gym, and how painful it’s going to be.

You’re not thinking about him walking into the bedroom, changing into workout clothes, filling up a water bottle, finding his keys, driving to the gym, walking all the way inside the gym, finding a machine, and then actually having to do the work.

Instead, you jump over the reality, the science, and the truth about how hard change is for everyone—and you jump right into anger over the fact that they aren't doing what you want them to do right when you want them to do it.

In reality, what that situation requires is compassion, not contempt. . . and your audible sigh of disgust and bad mood isn’t going to launch them off the couch. In fact, those sighs of contempt are going to keep your spouse lying on the couch until they’ve lost the remote in the cushions.

No matter how loving your intentions are behind the audible sighs, your spouse is feeling like you’re trying to fix him—which feels more like pain, which means he’s now going to move away from you. It makes him feel defensive, and that’s just going to close him off from feeling like changing even more.





Enter: The Standoff


Pressure doesn’t create change—it creates resistance to it. When you try to exert control over someone else’s behavior, they instinctively resist your attempt to try to control them.

Instead of inspiring change, your pressure creates a battle over control.

When I spoke to Dr. Sharot, she reiterated that human beings have a hardwired need to be in control. It’s a survival instinct. Feeling like you’re in control of your life is what makes you feel safe. Feeling in control is what makes everyone else in your life feel safe too.

That means your spouse, your roommate, your mom, your boss, and your friends all have that same hardwired survival instinct to be in control, just like you do.

The people that you love only feel safe when they feel in control of their own life.

So when you start to push people around, pressure them, or tell them what to do, you are threatening their hardwired need for control over their own lives, decisions, and actions. You’re getting in the way of their agency, the feeling that they are in control of themselves, their life, and their own thoughts and behaviors.

By hinting to someone that “it’s a nice day for a run outside” when someone doesn’t feel like going for a run, you just threatened them. Your suggestion—no matter how helpful you may mean for it to be—feels like you’re trying to take away their right to be their own person who does what they want, when they want.

This is why you must let adults be adults. Let Them.

Acceptance of another person, as they are, is the foundation of a healthy and loving relationship. When someone feels that you accept them as they are, they feel safe with you.

The opposite happens when you pressure, change, criticize, push, or expect someone to behave differently than they are. This pressure puts you and your loved one in a battle for control, whether or not you realize it.

Remember Dr. K’s research about how the brain is wired to move toward pleasure and away from pain? Feeling your pressure is painful, which is why they are moving away from you. Which only makes you push harder, and that makes them resist more.

This will be a never-ending standoff between the two of you. You have the power to end it.

Let Them sit on the couch, because if you want to end the standoff, you have to.

If you think about my friend and her husband, who has the control? The husband. As long as he ignores his wife, he’s in control of his life, his decisions, and his behavior.

The second he does what she says, he loses his sense of agency and she “wins.” At this point, the argument is not about exercising anymore, but who holds the power.

It also explains why she can’t let it go. His health worries the hell out of her and makes her feel like she’s lost control of an important part of her life. . . So she keeps trying to control him, to make herself feel more in control of this part of her life.

That just makes him feel threatened, and push back for the sake of his own survival. And, the more stubborn he becomes, the harder she pushes.

Can you see how this dynamic creates a gridlock that just keeps escalating?

And maybe you can see this same gridlock between you and one of your kids, or an aging parent, or you and your partner. Or maybe you feel this gridlock because somebody else is pressuring you.

Here’s the truth: No one wants to feel pressured by their friends, family, or loved ones. What you want is unconditional love, acceptance, kindness, and compassion. You don’t want to be controlled; you want to feel deeply accepted for who you are, and where you are in your life.

That’s what allows you to truly be yourself and feel safe in your relationships.

You certainly don’t want your best friend telling you she doesn’t like your boyfriend, or your partner knocking you over the head with a gym membership, Peloton, and organic groceries.

That brings me to another truth.

Most of the time, the person probably does want to change, deep down. Dr. K talked a lot about this internal tension that people feel when they know their behavior isn’t good for them in the long run.

That’s exactly what my friend’s husband feels. That’s why he stops and starts. That’s why he keeps trying. That’s why he’s struggling.

Change is hard for everyone. And it’s even harder when you have someone breathing down your neck, and you not only have to deal with their pressure, but you’ll also have to admit that they were right when you finally end up doing the work.

Dr. K couldn’t emphasize enough that it needs to be THEIR idea to change, not yours. The husband needs to have a reason to push himself to do the hard work—other than just shutting his wife up. Otherwise, this change will never last, and the resentment between them will just grow.





People Do What They Feel Like Doing


People only change when they are ready to make that change for themselves. Stop punishing them for not changing on your timeline. Stop trying to “motivate” them into doing something they clearly don’t want to do.

It is a waste of your time. It is stressing you out. It is ruining your relationship. It is not working. And most importantly, it is driving a wedge between the two of you.

Loving people means that you have to meet them where they are. You must learn how to let adults be adults. This is why the Let Them Theory is so effective.

When you Let Them be, you’re accepting them for who they are right now. Let Them be on their own timeline. Let Them fail at their career. Let Them vape. Let Them give up. Let Them stay in that miserable relationship. Let Them make promises they don’t keep. Let Them be messy. Let Them wear the sweatpants to the dinner party. Let Them play video games all weekend. Let Them feel the consequences of their inaction. Let Them sit on the couch and never go to the gym. Let Them live their life.

It’s simple, but I didn’t say it was easy. I know that you may read this, thinking, Oh. So there’s nothing I can do? There’s always something you can do.

Because there’s always something within your control: it’s YOU. The only behavior change that you can control is your own. And this is where your power is.

The first change in your behavior is to stop pressuring and start accepting. Let Them be. When you accept them as they are, the frustrating and ineffective battle for control ends and you set yourself up to win the war for positive change.

It’s science.

But I’m sure you’re wondering. . . if pressure doesn’t work, what does? I said you couldn’t change their behavior. . . but I never said you couldn’t influence it. And this is where Let Me comes in and helps you unlock the power of your influence.

Decades of research from neuroscientists and psychologists say that you can’t motivate someone to change, but you can “inspire” them to change and even make them believe it was all their idea to do so.

I’ll show you in the next chapter how you can tap into someone’s innate desire to change by choosing NOT to pressure them: Let Them. And instead, use your influence by saying and doing the right thing at the right time, based on the research.





CHAPTER 15



Unlock the Power of Your Influence

When you stop trying to pressure people to change and Let Them be, something magical happens. You now have time and energy to unlock the power of your positive influence.

People are social creatures that are highly influenced and inspired by the people around them. This has been proven over and over by decades of research on human behavior. This is why when you see someone online gushing about a protein powder, or a new style of jeans, or a pro golfer holding up a club that “improved their golf game,” you suddenly feel yourself wanting to buy it.

If you see something working positively for someone else, it often makes you feel interested in it too. Whether you realize it’s happening or not, when someone else is either having a lot of fun, or getting the results you want, or making something look easy and pleasurable, you are hardwired to move toward it. It’s why when you hear a friend raving about a book, you naturally want to read it.

If someone starts eating a crisp, red apple on the train, research shows people around them start craving one too. If a co-worker starts taking a walk outside at lunch—you’re more likely to suddenly feel like going for a walk at lunch too.

The reason why influence works is backed by decades of research on human behavior. We are social creatures and are highly influenced and inspired by the people around us. Dr. Sharot calls it “social contagion,” which is a fancy way to say that people’s behavior is contagious.

Using this with people in your life is very simple: Model the behavior change you want to see and walk the talk you’ve been asking for. If you have ANY shot at influencing them to move toward the behavior or change you want them to make, you need to show them how easy it is. You can’t ask someone else to eat healthier while you’re raving about the croissant you just ate. But you can influence them if you’re always eating healthy meals yourself and raving about how good it tastes.

You can’t ask someone to stop looking at their phone when you’ve got your phone in your hand. But you can influence them by keeping your phone in a different room and modeling better boundaries with your devices.

Model the behavior you want to see. What I love about this research is that it’s a sneaky way to get someone else to change and believe it was their idea.

Let’s just take the example of the co-worker who goes on a walk every day. If you see someone else do that every day for a few weeks, it starts to influence you subconsciously. You watch them leave every day at lunch, you watch them come back after their walk, and they are in a better mood, and have more energy, and they are smiling. And then you see it happen again the next day when, as they walk out the door, you’re sitting at your desk, shoving a sandwich in your mouth, working through your lunch break.

A half an hour later, they walk back in, looking refreshed, energized, and happy. Their example influences you even though you’re not consciously thinking about it. And guess what happens if you see this over and over, and they seem to enjoy it? All of a sudden one day, you look outside, you see it’s a beautiful day, and you suddenly feel like going for a walk during your lunch break, instead of working through lunch like you usually do.

Here’s what I love about the power of influence: As you head out the door for your walk, you think this was your idea. Nope. It was the influence of your co-worker working its magic on your brain. And they weren’t even trying to do so! They were just going for a walk and enjoying it. Makes sense, doesn’t it?

That’s the power of your influence, and you can use this research to inspire anyone in your life to change. Here’s how:

First, Let Them be.

Stop pressuring them to change. Accept that you can’t control their behavior or actions. Adults only do what they feel like doing. Your job is to accept them for who they are and where they are.

Let Them be. Then, Let Me.





Use Your Influence


Remember, the power is in your influence. That means focus on what you can control: your behavior. Model change and make it look fun and easy.

Dr. Sharot’s research shows that your influence is highly effective, but it requires a lot of patience because it will take time for your positive influence to take effect in someone else’s brain.

So you’re going to need to say Let Them a lot as you just focus on your own behavior and your attitude about it. It’s important to do this without the expectation that they will change. The reason why you have to give up your expectations is that if you do this expecting them to change, you’ll start to resent them when they don’t.

Focus on yourself, model the behavior and the positive attitude because it works for you, and hold out the hope that the magic of your influence will work on them. Be prepared to give it six months or more. I know what you’re thinking.

Six months?!

Yes. Six months. It could absolutely take six months or more of you going to the gym, making it look easy, and seeing incredible results with your influence to make the person in your life suddenly feel motivated to exercise for themselves. If you don’t want to wait that long, or if you’re already in a very frustrating standoff with someone that you care about, it’s time for advanced techniques in the science of influence.





The ABC Loop


The ABC Loop is a tool that I’ve created, based on combining the best of what experts say will work, and I’ve put it into a simple formula that you can follow with anyone in your life.

In the ABC Loop, you have three steps:

A: APOLOGIZE, then ASK open-ended questions.

B: BACK OFF, and observe their BEHAVIOR.

C: CELEBRATE progress while you continue to model the CHANGE.



Let’s take each of these three steps, one by one, and show you exactly what to do and explain with science and the Let Them Theory why this works.





1. The Ground Rules: Using the ABC Loop


If you want to use advanced techniques, you’ve got to be willing to do a little preparation.

The ABC Loop begins with a conversation that follows a proven, scientific technique. This conversation is very different from any of the conversations you have had about this issue in the past. You’re going to follow a research-backed method that is used by medical professionals in clinical settings. To ensure that this conversation is successful, you need to take it seriously, and do the prep work before you have it.

If the issue has been around for a while, you probably have a lot of pent-up frustration and emotion about it. That’s part of the problem, and it’s why you’re at a standoff. This preparation, and setting up the conversation correctly, will defuse your emotion and help you be way more effective.

The conversation needs to be in person, without any alcohol involved or time pressure to finish quickly. Do not have the conversation in a random place, or when you only have 20 minutes on the phone. It doesn’t work like that. It’s really about connecting at a deeper level with someone you care about on an issue that is bothering you.

This is also a time to show up and practice compassion and curiosity. It’s not an invitation for you to vent or complain about how frustrated and worried you are. The point is not to be “right.” The whole point is to communicate in a manner that neutralizes any tension and creates the space for positive change to happen.

The best way to do this is to come prepared to listen to the other person wholeheartedly without interrupting them.

If you follow the formula, you’ve got nothing to worry about, because you are coming from a place of love (and science). You got this.





2. The Prep Work: Using the “5 Whys” Method


Before you have the conversation, you need to get very clear about what exactly is making you so annoyed and why you want them to change. This is important because, before you can be honest with somebody else, you have to be brutally honest with YOURSELF.

Here’s how you can get to the truth with yourself. Grab a blank piece of paper, crack open a journal, or get out your Notes app.

The idea here is to rise above your emotions and get to the truth of why this bothers you so much, using a proven technique called the 5 Whys method. The 5 Whys method was created by Sakichi Toyoda, an inventor and founder of the Toyota family companies, as a way to help engineers uncover the root cause of a particular problem, and it’s now taught in business schools and engineering programs around the world.

The 5 Whys method is a formula that I’ve used in my life, business, and marriage to help me get unstuck and gain profound insights whenever I’ve faced a problem I can’t seem to solve.

In this method, you’ll ask “why?” five total times until you feel like you’ve gotten to a much deeper answer as to why this bothers you so much.

Here’s how you use the 5 Whys method:

Ask yourself: Why does this person’s behavior (or this situation) bother me so much? Think about it, and write or say your answer.

And then, ask it again:

Why does that bother you?

And then again: Why does that bother you? And then again: Why does that bother you? And then a final time: Why does that bother you?

Here’s an example of how that could look with my friend who is upset about her husband’s health. Let’s ask her:

Why does this behavior/situation bother you? It bothers me because he doesn’t seem to care about his health.

Why does that bother you? He is modeling unhealthy habits for our kids.

Why does that bother you? It’s like he’s ignoring everything important for an extra beer, 15 minutes longer at the TV, and an ice cream. . . and it’s making him unattractive.

Why does that bother you? He’s the love of my life and I think he’s being selfish. I don’t want him to have a heart attack when he could just get off the couch and exercise.

Why does that bother you? I’m terrified that I’ll lose him before I have to.

See how that works? It’s pretty obvious, 5 Whys later, that this issue is probably a lot deeper than her being mad at him. That’s exactly why it stresses her out so much. And here’s what else you need to know: Your answers will be deeply personal to you.

Give yourself permission to get to the root cause even if you discover something ugly about yourself. Having done this exercise with thousands of people, one theme that comes up a lot that is very hard to see in yourself is judgment of the other person, and how their behavior reflects badly on you (or so you think).

For example, you might answer the 5 Whys and conclude that the real reason you’re upset about someone’s drinking is because you’re embarrassed to have a son with a drinking problem. Or you’re ashamed to be married to someone who is not successful.

And whatever you learn by using the 5 Whys method is personal to you, and you do not have to share what you learn with the person. You can if you think it will help you apologize for pressuring them, but this is about you getting to the root cause of your frustration, and it will always have to do with their behavior making you feel a loss of control.

Allow yourself to be honest. When you see that it’s been about YOU all along, and your need to control, it is easier to drop the pressure and Let Them be. And that puts you into a grounded place as you go into your conversation using the ABC Loop.

Which begins with:





THE ABC LOOP





Step A: APOLOGIZE, then ASK open-ended questions.


This first step utilizes an evidence-based technique to elicit change called motivational interviewing, which I learned about from Dr. K.

Dr. K says that this is one of the only ways that is effective in helping you influence someone else’s motivation to change, and it’s the technique that he uses with his patients, who are struggling to find the motivation to change.

My favorite part of this technique is that it focuses on asking open-ended questions. The thought behind this technique is that getting the person to talk about how THEY feel will encourage them to think about the disconnect between what they want and their current behavior.

This is the opposite of pressure. Instead of thinking you know what someone should do, you’re asking open-ended questions because you’re curious about where someone stands with their behavior.

The best way to start this conversation is to first apologize. You could say something like: “I want to apologize for judging and pressuring you, and I realized I’ve never asked you how you feel about your. . .”

Health.

Grades.

Job search.

Being single.

Living situation.

Marriage.

Drinking.

Finances.

Starting with an apology sets the tone for a compassionate and supportive conversation. Really listen, lean in, and try to learn about how this person feels about the issue.

Whatever they say, just keep asking them open-ended questions that reflect back the answers they just gave you.

For my friend, it could be something like: “How are you feeling about your health right now?”

According to Dr. K, the question invites someone to really experience the tension between how they truly feel about where they are, and the fact that they are not doing anything about it.

“Each action that you take in life is individual,” he says. “And in motivational interviewing, we help people understand this principle. What we want to do is encourage people to think about their own situation.”

Then, no matter what their answer to the first question is, you’re not going to share your feelings about it. You’re just going to repeat back their answer: “So it sounds like. . .”

So it sounds like you’re feeling okay about your health?

If they answer in a one-word response—“Okay”—no problem. Just turn it into another open-ended question.

What makes you feel okay about it?

And then continue to just listen with curiosity and acceptance, and respond only with open-ended questions that repeat back what they just said.

It sounds like you’re okay with your health because you’ve been this way for a long time.

Here are some follow-up questions that Dr. K recommended for just about any topic:

How do you feel about that?

So it sounds like you’ve gotten used to it.

I mean, you’re saying you’re comfortable. It almost feels a little bit more to me like resignation. Do you feel like it’s going to take too much work to change?

What feels hard about it?

It must be incredibly frustrating to have me nagging you all the time, expecting more of you.

Can you tell me a little bit about how long you’ve felt that way?

So I hear you saying that you don’t need me to do anything?

And I need to remind you again: You are just asking questions. Your opinions are irrelevant and they are not for this conversation. The second you offer one, you’ll be pressuring the person and it will kill the effectiveness of this technique.

This technique has been proven in research and clinical settings to be very effective in getting people to admit to themselves that there is a big disconnect between what they actually want and what their current behavior is.

And that is your goal: to make them feel the tension between these things.

I have to emphasize: Do not get discouraged if all you get is one word answers, or they keep trying to change the subject. The point of this technique is not to get them to tell you the truth. It’s to create discomfort that they feel internally. They may not express it to you.

That tension is critical, because it ultimately becomes the source of their motivation to change. Seeing the disconnect between what they want and their current actions is what pushes them to eventually change for themselves.

That’s why you can’t insert yourself. You are just a vehicle for getting them to experience the disconnect, and you are doing it in a way that is loving, compassionate, and curious. You just want to know how they feel about this topic.

This conversation is a critical component for awakening their motivation to change. So Let Them talk. And Let Me listen.





Step B: BACK OFF, and observe their BEHAVIOR.


Now that you’ve apologized for your behavior and asked them the open-ended questions, you have to back off and stop pressuring them.

Don’t expect them to launch into action. They are going to need to marinate on it. This is also why it’s critical to model the change, and make it look easy and fun, while you give them the freedom to figure out for themselves why this issue matters to them.

Think of the example of the co-worker going for a walk. It might take watching someone do that for months before you feel inspired to go on a walk for yourself. And if you really think about it, every time you see your co-worker go on a walk while you work through lunch, you feel tension in your body as you sit there inside working through your lunch break. Eventually that tension transforms into the motivation that gets you out the door.

That’s why you have to give this time. It takes time for tension to transform into motivation. Let Them be.

All you can do after you’ve asked the open-ended questions is observe the behavior and stop yourself from trying to change it. If you are seeing them change, amazing. If not, Let Them be.

This takes time, particularly with somebody that you love. So back off. They need enough space, time, and distance from the conversation with you to feel like they’re not going to get an “I told you so.” Space allows them to come to the idea for themselves. Time allows the tension to transform into motivation.





Step C: CELEBRATE progress while you continue to model CHANGE.


Once you’ve asked the open-ended questions and you’ve backed off while continuing to model the behavior change, you have to celebrate any progress you see. Whenever they make the smallest move forward, celebrate it.

Dr. Sharot’s research says that immediate positive compliments are a key driver to influencing behavior change. For example, if your spouse one day heads down to the basement and hops on the Peloton, that’s amazing. When they come back upstairs, give them a hug. Tell them you’re proud of them.

Dr. Sharot says that one of the most effective things you can do is tell them how attractive they look, or give them a kiss on the cheek, as soon as they are done working out or doing what you want them to do.

It sounds cheesy, but it actually works.





It’s Simple. People Want to Feel Good.


According to the research, immediate positive rewards after someone does something hard will boost their intrinsic motivation or desire to do it again. When you acknowledge their effort, it acts like fuel to keep them going.

The hard thing gets fused with something really pleasurable: the reward that you are providing. And remember what Dr. K taught you about the human brain: We are wired to move toward what feels pleasurable, easy, and fun.

The more my friend compliments, hugs, and admires her husband post-workout, the faster her husband will connect working out with compliments, desire, and the fact that his wife thinks he looks damn good. Her positive attention becomes the pleasure he moves toward, and what has been missing this entire time.

This isn’t just common sense. It’s neuroscience. You learned that humans are wired to move toward immediate positive benefits. The good things. The celebrations. So often, we approach change with negative reinforcements, threats, pressure, and fear, when the real success lies in being accepting, compassionate, and showing your support in a genuine and effective way.

It makes sense, doesn’t it? Of course it does.

Adults only do what they feel like doing. Your power is in your positive influence. Let Them be. And Let Me use the science to inspire change. Let Them helps you rise above the emotions and broken dynamics to strengthen your connection, while Let Me influences positive behavior change in the people you love.

They may change immediately. They may change in a week. They may change in several months. It may take years. Maybe they might never change.

And that’s okay too.

Later in the book, we’ll discuss what happens when you’ve tried the ABC Loop, you’ve backed off for six months, and there’s still no positive change. When this happens, you’ll need to decide if this is a deal breaker or not. It’s not fair to stay in a relationship where you are chronically complaining about someone else. You hold the power, always, to make something better or to learn how to accept things as they are.

The most important change in any relationship is the one that you can control: yours. You change how you showed up. You stop pressuring the person that you love and become more loving.

That’s what makes you influential.

And in the process, if you do it right, you don’t just reduce the friction between you and the person that you love. You also make the relationship much better along the way.

But what about when the stakes are really high, and it’s not just a matter of someone getting in better shape, or being a little more motivated at work, or being more proactive and helpful around the house?

What if the person you love is spiraling? Do you just Let Them keep drinking? Do you just Let Them lie in bed with depression? Do you just Let Them fall apart?

I saw these questions over and over again while researching this book. In the next chapter, you’ll learn an entirely new approach to supporting someone who is struggling, using the Let Them Theory and the latest expert research.

But first, let’s summarize how to motivate other people to change. Yes, you want people in your life to change, but pressuring them only creates resistance to it.

The Let Them Theory encourages you to accept others, focus on your own growth, and inspire change through positive influence instead of pressure.

Problem: Pressure doesn’t create change; it creates resistance to it. You are acting with the best of intentions, but it is yielding the worst result. Every time you pressure someone, it pushes them away. You are not only straining your relationships, you are fighting against the wiring inside someone’s brain and body. You think the tension and frustration are due to the fact that the other person won’t do as you wish. You are wrong. The tension and disconnection are being created by your pressure.

Truth: Adults only change when they feel like changing. Human beings have a hardwired survival instinct to be in control of every aspect of their life. Anytime someone feels like they are being forced to do something, they will fight back—and you will find yourself locked in a battle for control. What human beings want is to feel acceptance and love. They need to be in control of their own thoughts, actions, and decisions. Your power is in your influence.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, you will leverage the laws of influence to unlock someone else’s intrinsic motivation to change for themselves. By using the ABC Loop to ask open-ended questions, model behavior change, and celebrate progress, you use your power to change other people. The key piece of this is creating the space for someone else to believe the change is their idea. Not yours.



When you say Let Them, you are accepting other people as they are, removing tension and pressure, and letting them have control over the way they live their life. When you say Let Me, you use neuroscience to your advantage and unlock your power of influence to motivate someone else to change.

Let adults be adults, and let your influence inspire them to change.





Helping Someone

Who Is Struggling





CHAPTER 16



The More You Rescue, The More They Sink

I know what you may be thinking: Let adults be adults? But what if the person I’m trying to change is in serious trouble? What am I supposed to do, just let them spiral? Let them drink and drive?

Of course not.

If someone is doing something dangerous or self-destructive, you don’t just Let Them. You step in, take the keys, or do whatever is necessary to help because your response might just save their life—whether that’s calling for help, or calling the police, or driving them to detox, or staying with them through a crisis until they are in a safe place.

The problem is that most people who are struggling hide it from you. They are not doing drugs in front of you; they are lying to you about it. They’re putting on a brave face at work but secretly struggling with depression.

Part of the challenge with people who are struggling is not knowing the extent to which they have been, until it’s really serious or it’s too late. And, I guarantee you, there is at least one person in your life who is struggling immensely and you have no idea.

When people are struggling, they have a lot of shame and are often in denial about it. They already feel like a burden and often tell themselves they are letting everyone down. Which is why people often don’t ask for help or open up about what is going on.

Watching someone you love struggle with their mental health, crippling grief, or an addiction is one of the hardest experiences you will face in life. And an even harder truth is: Not everyone is ready to get better, be sober, do the work, use their tools, or face their issues. And not everybody can.

As much as you may love someone and believe in them and would do anything in the world to make their pain go away, you cannot want someone else’s sobriety, healing, or health more than they do.

In this section of the book, we will unpack how, in your attempt to help, you may unknowingly be preventing other adults from finding their strength to face their struggles. The more you try to rescue someone from their problems, the more likely they will continue to drown in them. Allowing someone to face the natural consequences of their actions is a necessary part of healing. The fact is, adults only get better when they are ready to do the work, and you will be ready way before they are. It sounds harsh, but it’s true.

You and I are going to take everything you’ve learned so far about relationships, friendships, and human nature, and build on it to show you how those truths apply even in the most difficult situations.

You will also learn a brand-new approach to supporting someone through their struggles, which is grounded in the belief that someone can do the work to get better.

But before we jump in, one BIG disclaimer: There is a difference between supporting an adult who is struggling and supporting a child who is struggling. When you are dealing with a child, you are responsible for their emotional, financial, and physical support.

When you are dealing with an adult, you are not.





The Hard Truth About Healing


As you learned, pressuring someone to change creates resistance to changing, and your frustration and judgment are only going to make the situation with someone struggling worse. The higher the stakes, the more shame and paralysis the other person feels.

People only heal when they are ready. And if they haven’t, it’s because they aren’t ready. When someone you love is going through an internal struggle, they will not get better for you, their kids, or their family. They have to want to get better for themselves.

You may not understand it. You may think you would act differently if you were in the same situation. None of that matters. All of your opinions are judgment. And your judgment of the other person and what you think they should do is part of the problem, because it translates to pressure.

You need an outlet for your judgment—a therapist, a friend—because it won’t help to aim it at the other person. In times of struggle, what the other person needs is acceptance. Let Them struggle.

People only heal when they are ready to do it for themselves. These are deeply personal, difficult battles. . . and they can only be fought by that person when they’re ready to fight. You cannot make them fight. You cannot make them get sober. You cannot make someone financially responsible. You cannot make them heal.

Yes, they need your love and support. But here’s the hard part: They do not need to be “rescued.” I will say this again: The more you try to rescue someone from their problems, the more likely they will continue to drown in them. The more you judge someone for their behavior, the better they will get at lying to you about it.

It’s imperative that you realize that rescuing someone isn’t supporting them, and enabling someone’s self-destructive behavior isn’t loving them. There is a thin line between what constitutes support, and what is enabling people.

Enabling is when you justify or support someone’s problematic behaviors because you think you’re helping them. For example, it can include things like giving money to an adult child who is not using it responsibly and is not looking for a job. It can look like covering for people because they were out drinking last night, making excuses for your spouse’s anger, or ignoring the problem to avoid conflict.

Often, loving someone will require you to let them learn the hard way. Sometimes, reclaiming your power means not fixing everyone else’s problems or making excuses for their behavior.

When you enable others with your money, words, and actions, you don’t foster independence—you hinder their healing. You prolong their suffering, their debt, their breakdown, and in turn, your own. You think you’re making it easier, but you’re actually making their recovery or their self-improvement harder.

Allowing other adults to face and feel the natural consequences of their actions is one of the most important steps of healing.

The Let Them Theory teaches you that helping others doesn’t mean solving their problems for them—it means giving them the space, support, and tools to do it themselves.

Think of healing as a game that the person you love must choose to play. Offering support is like throwing someone the ball. You can toss the ball to them over and over, but they have to choose to catch it and run down the field. Enabling is when you grab the ball and try to run it down the field every time they won’t.

Let Them drop the ball. Let Me stop throwing it. Let Me resist the urge to pick it up and run down the field. Let Me stop lying about what is happening. Let Me accept the fact that they are not ready to change. I get it: One of the hardest things in the world is to watch somebody that you love struggle. I’m not a heartless person. I have lost too many people that I love to the diseases of hopelessness and addiction. I wish they would have caught the ball. But no amount of wishing can bring them back or make someone who’s struggling do the work to get better.

All you can do is recognize the situation that you are in. If they are unwilling to catch the ball, you must stop throwing it. We both know that deep in your heart, the second they are ready to catch the ball, you will be waiting to toss it.





Adults Heal When They Are Ready to Do the Hard Work


You can’t want somebody’s sobriety or their healing or their financial freedom or their ambition or their happiness more than they do. You will be ready for your loved one to get better, way before they are. Which is why you need to remain in control of your response to the situation. You are not dealing with someone who is capable of rational thought or healthy decision-making.

This is always true when you’re dealing with a child, because their brains are not fully formed. Which is why you cannot allow a child to drive their own healing. According to the experts, a human brain from a developmental perspective doesn’t mature fully until 25 years old. Legally you are an adult at 18, but from a neuroscience perspective, someone between the ages of 18 and 25 still needs a lot of guidance.

So you have to be the adult in the room getting professional help and steering what is happening. With adults over 25, it is different. Adults are responsible for their own healing. And they are also capable of it.

But regardless of the age of the person who is struggling, they are likely in pure survival mode, from a neurological standpoint. Particularly if someone is spiraling from depression or addiction or facing a tragedy, they are in a chronic state of fight, flight, or freeze.

And this is why things get painful and tricky. You can’t get them out of survival mode. You can soothe someone in the moment by giving them a hug, or sitting with them while they cry, or listening until they feel calm and present, but you can’t get them out of a chronically stressed state. They are going to have to do the work to get there themselves.

Everything that you learned in the chapters about managing stress, influencing other people to change, and the wiring of the brain applies here. Dr. K taught you that human beings are hardwired to move toward what feels easier and pleasurable in the moment, and to avoid what is painful and hard.

When you are depressed, staying in bed feels easier. When you are grieving, it’s easy to think you’ll never get through this. When you are struggling, reaching for a drink eases the pain.

That is why the people you love can find themselves struggling with the same demons for years. They would love to get better. They probably doubt that they can.

In periods of my life where I’ve struggled with severe postpartum depression or crippling anxiety, that was one of my many fears: that I would never climb out of this. That’s why the process of getting better will always feel worse in the beginning. That is why people avoid it and act out in ways that don’t make sense.

I once heard an addiction specialist say that no one gets sober until being drunk is more painful than facing the thing you are running from. Hearing that made so much sense for me and it can help you move from a place of judgment into a place of understanding and compassion.

That person needs pain in order to galvanize the will to change.

It’s true about any struggle. No one heals an eating disorder until restricting is more painful than facing the issues they are running from. No one faces sex addiction until hiding it is more painful than facing the truth.

What every expert I spoke to in researching this book said is that struggling is a critical part of the human experience, and it is one of the most necessary elements of someone choosing to get better.

Notice the word choosing.

Someone who is struggling is running away from their problems and numbing their pain. Healing is a choice. This fact creates a problem for you and me, because you will always feel this tension between letting someone struggle and, at the exact same time, desperately wanting to make someone’s pain go away.

I’ve made this mistake. I thought, If I can just make their life easier, I make change easier, right? Wrong.

There is a huge difference between trying to make someone’s pain go away and offering support that allows them to do the work themselves. What’s difficult about this is that every situation is different, and you’re going to have to figure out what support looks like for you.

These painful experiences are also part of the motivational circuitry that Dr. K talked about. In other words, if it’s easier to avoid the problem, they will never face it.





“Let People Learn from Life.”


Dr. Robert Waldinger is a practicing psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, as well as a clinical professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School. He also leads the Harvard Study of Adult Development, one of the most extensive and long-standing research projects on adult life. Dr. Waldinger addressed this specifically when I talked to him:

Let people learn from life. Don’t shield them from the consequences of what they choose. If somebody says, “I don’t really want to get a job.” “Okay, well, how are you going to pay your rent?” There are lots of things we can do to help people meet the challenges of life by not shielding them from the challenges of life. This often happens in the realm of addiction with loved ones. We have to let people deal with the pain of losing a job, or losing a partner because they’re addicted to some substance. Don’t try to run in and make it all better. When we let people face the real-world consequences of the choices they make, they hopefully learn from them.



Maybe they need to spend a night in jail.

Maybe they need to lose their job, or their family.

Maybe you need to take them out of college.

Maybe they need to live with you, because they need family around them.

Maybe they are so far gone, they are going to become homeless.

And it’s not just in the most extreme cases like addiction and severe mental illness. This same principle applies when someone is struggling with homesickness, anxiety, or self-doubt.

Dr. Luana Marques, a clinical psychologist and lecturer at Harvard Medical School, told me that avoidance is a habit and coping mechanism that is very common when someone is confronted.

Your loved one is going to avoid situations, conversations, or behavior changes that feel hard. It’s human nature to reach for what feels easy and move away from facing what is difficult. It’s important to embrace the facts here, so that you can approach this from a rational and science-backed approach.





Stop Avoiding the Problem


I’ll give you an example from my life when one of my kids was struggling. I didn’t handle it the right way. In my attempts to lessen my daughter’s anxiety, I actually ended up making everything worse.

While this book is really about adult relationships, the laws of human nature apply to parenting young adults as well. Just remember: When you’re the parent, you are responsible for your child’s physical, mental, and emotional needs.

When our daughter was in middle school, she had a very scary bout of anxiety. It would rev up all day long, and culminate in her waking up in the middle of the night and not wanting to be alone in her room. She would come to our bedroom, and I made the mistake of welcoming her into our bed for the first couple nights.

Every time I said it was okay for her to sleep in our room, I was helping her avoid the anxious feelings and I thought I was making things easier for her. But what I didn’t realize is that I was actually making it harder for her to face whatever was underneath this anxiety.

Every single night, she would wake up just before midnight and wander down, and I tried to get up and reassure her, but she refused to go back upstairs alone. Eventually, she would wear me down, and after several nights of her climbing into my bed, I just started creating a little bed on the floor of my room for her.

This went on for six months, every single night.

This is what Dr. Marques meant when she explained that “avoidance is a coping mechanism when someone is struggling.” Our daughter was scared to sleep in her room, so she was avoiding it. By allowing her to sleep on our floor, I made her anxiety worse. Every day, when I said, “You can sleep on the floor of our room,” I was telling her with my actions, “I believe you’re not strong enough to face this.”

This may not seem like a big deal, but it’s a really big deal. Over the next few years, her anxiety got way worse, because I had helped her learn how to avoid facing it. I had taught her that the solution to anxious feelings was to run away from them. That only made her anxiety worse and her impulse to run stronger.

Everything made her anxious: going to school, sitting in the car alone, sleeping at a friend’s house, going to guitar practice. Any small, normal moment of nerves would escalate into an anxiety attack where she “needed me.”

I flew home from a vacation with my husband because she was inconsolable, and our babysitter had no idea how to handle her—and neither did I. I blame myself. I’m the parent. And I allowed both of us to avoid facing this difficult situation head on. I was rescuing her, when the truth is, she had the strength, the ability, and the power to work through her anxiety and fears, and learn how to be okay whenever she was feeling anxious or uncomfortable.

It wasn’t until Chris had finally had enough that we took her to see a therapist, and learned that the only way somebody gets stronger is by facing the things they feel too weak to face. And it’s exactly what the Let Them Theory is going to help you do.

The fact is, it is normal to wake up in the middle of the night and feel anxious. It didn’t have to spiral into a six-month ordeal. Anxiety didn’t have to become the predominant issue in my daughter’s life for the next decade.

You are way more capable than you give yourself credit for, and so is the person you love. You can’t control whether or not someone else feels anxious. You can’t control whether or not they get up in the middle of the night and come down to your bedroom. But you can always control what YOU think, do, and say in response.

When someone you love is struggling, I want you to picture yourself putting your arm around their shoulders and offering support, as you encourage them to face what they are avoiding.

You can’t control their anxious reactions. Your power is in your response. Here’s how you can use Let Me to offer that support:

Let Me validate what they are feeling: “Oh honey, I’m sorry you feel so scared.”

Let Me separate my emotions from theirs: “This is hard for me, too, to see you so sad.”

Let Me comfort the person I love who is struggling: A hug always does wonders.

And then Let Me support them by assuring them that they have within them the ability to do something that feels hard.

Then, stand by their side as they do the hard thing—which, for me, meant getting up every night, in the middle of the night, and walking my daughter back to her room, and putting her back in her bed.

And I’m not going to lie, for the first few nights, I felt like a monster as she would cry and plead. I wanted to fire the therapist and throw in the towel on this plan, and allow her to sleep back on the floor. I mean eventually she will want her own bed, right?!

But I didn’t do that. It took about five days, and it was not easy for me to see her crying and pleading. It wasn’t easy to tuck her into her bed and then go stand outside her door until I heard her drift back to sleep. Some nights she would wake up again and come down again, not once but a few more times, and I would take the time to comfort her, put my arm around her, and walk with her back up those stairs to help her face what she was avoiding.

Look at people’s struggles as an opportunity to support them in discovering their strengths. If someone learns that they are too weak to face their struggles, they will never experience what is truly possible.

And if you always swoop in and rescue someone, they will start expecting you to do it when life gets hard. But if they see themselves moment by moment, day by day, facing the hard and scary things in life with you by their side, you teach them that they are capable of doing things that are way beyond what they see for themselves.

Stop rescuing people from their problems and start acting as if you believe in their ability to face them. Your actions are the loudest and truest form of communication. So when you act in a way that supports someone in facing what scares them, your behavior says, “I believe in you. You can do this. And I’ll be here by your side as you face it.”

Supporting people through struggle is very hard to do. It is draining. It takes a lot of time and patience. It is frustrating. That is why a lot of us resort to enabling or rescuing people. It is much easier to let them sleep on the floor, transfer schools, quit their job, ignore it and hope it goes away, or, the most common way people enable others: throw money at it.

So the question becomes: How do you support someone effectively?





CHAPTER 17



How to Provide Support the Right Way

Since there were so many questions about HOW to effectively balance supporting someone without rescuing them, I want to share a very specific suggestion almost every expert I spoke with raised.

When you are supporting an adult who is struggling, one of the biggest levers you have to pull is what you will spend money for and what you will not.

If you are giving financial support to someone in an attempt to help them through a hard time, you better be very clear about the conditions upon which you are giving that support.

If you give money without conditions, it will lead to massive resentment on your end. The money is not a gift. And unconditional love does not mean unconditional financial support.

Often unconditional love means withdrawing financial support. This is very hard, especially for parents of adult children who are struggling, and it’s often the very last lever that is pulled.

There is this term in recovery called rock bottom. We tend to talk about rock bottom moments related to the person who is struggling. But what we don’t talk about enough, is that you, as the loved one, will have a rock bottom moment too.

It happens when you’ve “tried everything.” Nothing is working. You are suffering. And then it hits you: There is one thing I haven’t tried: I haven’t stopped subsidizing their life. At some point, you’ll realize that by paying someone’s rent, bills, tuition, or giving them a place to live without any conditions, you are enabling their self-destructive behavior.

Remember what Dr. Waldinger said? “Don’t shield them from the consequences of what they choose.” At some point, you’re going to decide to stop subsidizing someone’s life, who refuses to do the work or get the professional help they need to get better.

Dr. Waldinger, and every other expert I spoke to, was adamant about this point: You owe people love, acceptance, and compassion. You do not owe them money. Because if you’re funding any aspect of someone’s life while they continue to refuse treatment, or won’t get a job, or don’t attend classes, or continue to lie or steal or be engaged in shady, avoidant behavior—you are part of the problem. Money without condition is enabling.

But providing money with specific conditions is support, and it can look like this: You can live here, if you’re sober. I’ll pay for therapy, as long as you and your therapist agree to a monthly check in with me. I’ll pay for tuition as long as you get a 3.0. I’ll pay your rent, phone bill, and car payments if you go to inpatient treatment for your eating disorder.

The hardest part is what happens when they don’t agree to the conditions. Because if they refuse to go to inpatient facilities or refuse to get a job, you’re going to have to take away all financial support, which means you stop paying their rent or kick them out of the house.

And I mean all financial support. They are not on your phone bill. You are not paying their rent. You’re not giving them logins for your streaming accounts. You’re not buying their groceries or paying for their Ubers. And yes, you may have provided a guarantee on the lease for their apartment. You are going to have to be willing to have that hit your credit.

They are going to hate you. They will likely spiral in the beginning. But when they refuse to honor the conditions upon which your support was given, you must be the adult. I am shocked at the number of parents who are asking about adult children who are struggling, whom they are financially supporting.

Let Them struggle. Let Them violate the terms of your support. And then, Let Me cut them off financially.

Very few people are willing to do this, because it feels cruel. That’s why throwing money at a situation is so common. But removing your financial support is the only thing that will work. Because it’s the only thing you have left when nothing else has worked. You do have power. And maybe this is the exact wake-up call that your loved one needs.

And if you’re reading this, and your parents are paying for your therapy, or your rent, or your education, or your phone bill, or any aspect of your life, I have news for you: They get to vote on how you’re living your life.

You don’t get to have someone else fund your life, and then have an attitude when they have an opinion about how you’re using their money. Having your parents pay for your therapy and then refusing to let them talk to your therapist is a form of gaslighting.

If you are sick of your parents’ opinions about what you should be doing, then start paying your own bills. As long as you are financially tied to someone else, you can say Let Them all you want, but their money is buying access to your life, whether you like it or not. If you want independence, prove it and start being financially independent for real.

And let’s be honest: The real reason why your parents’ opinions frustrate you so much is because you need their money, and you know it. You’re not mad at them; you’re mad at yourself for not being financially independent.





Stop Bailing Out Other Adults


I can give you a personal example of why it’s important to stop bailing people out without conditions. I mentioned earlier that when I was in my 40s, Chris and I were in crushing financial debt.

We had liens on the house and we were $800,000 in debt. Chris’s restaurant business was profoundly struggling. The business was missing payroll. Chris hadn’t been paid in months, I had just lost my job, and we were having trouble paying for things like groceries or even filling up the gas tank.

It was a really scary time. Chris and his business partner were desperately trying to raise money to keep the business afloat. I remember him asking his brother to loan him some money for the business.

His brother said no, and added, “I’m sorry if me not giving you this money is the reason why the business fails and you go bankrupt, but I won’t bail you out. You have got to figure out how to do this yourself.”

Was that harsh? No. It was honest. He wasn’t responsible for Chris’s business problems. Chris was. And he wasn’t responsible for propping up a failing business or rescuing Chris from his financial problems. It was super painful for Chris to hear that, but it was the truth. A few weeks later, Chris hit rock bottom.

The business hadn’t paid him in six months and it was running on fumes. He and his business partner had been working nonstop for years trying to make this business successful. It was this conversation with his brother that helped him realize that he had to get out.

The business couldn’t support two owners. Plus, Chris had developed a major problem with alcohol. He was drinking away the stress and engaging in other self-destructive behaviors. He was depressed, anxious, and knew he could no longer live like this. That was his rock bottom.

If his brother had loaned him the money, it would have just prolonged this devastating situation. When his brother said no, he had no choice but to rescue himself. That’s rock bottom and it changes your life for the better. Because, when you finally hit it, you connect with something solid inside yourself—the resolve to change.

It’s important to point out that Chris’s brother said no to money, but that doesn’t mean he wasn’t supportive. He listened to Chris, he validated his feelings, he felt a lot of compassion for him, and ultimately, by refusing to loan him money, he was saying, “I believe in your ability to figure this out.”

And you know what? Chris did figure it out. The right answer wasn’t propping up the restaurant. It wasn’t running away from the situation. The right answer was saying, “I’m not doing this anymore. I quit.”

The first step to changing your life is taking responsibility for the fact that your life isn’t working. That’s why you need to let the people that you love face reality, not help them run from it. It’s your job to love them, and believe in their ability to do the work, and support them from a safe distance, which is what Chris’s brother did. Because just like there are a million ways to solve a problem, there are also a million ways to provide support.





How to Create the Best Possible Environment for Healing


One of my favorite ways to provide support is thinking about how you can create an environment to help someone get better. What does that mean? There is a lot of research about the role that your physical environment plays in your mental, spiritual, and physical health. It’s everything from the space you live in, the clutter around you, the food in your fridge, the people that you spend time with, and the plans in your calendar.

Ask yourself, How can I create an environment that makes change and getting better easier? There are a million ways you can do this, but I want to start with an example from my life.

When our first daughter was born, I had a very complicated delivery and lost a lot of blood. By the time I was finally discharged and sent home, I was not only physically destroyed, but mentally dealing with severe postpartum depression.

It was so bad that I couldn’t be left alone with our baby for the first four months of her life. I couldn’t breastfeed because of the medications I was on. And I was so depleted, I spent most of the day sleeping or sitting like a zombie on the couch.

What I remember most is that no one asked me how they could help. They just showed up and created an environment for my healing without asking.

My cousin came over to clean. My parents drove across the country and sat with me for weeks. A new friend, Joanie, who was pregnant at the time, would come and just sit and keep me company so Chris could go to work. And while I dozed off to sleep, she would do a load of laundry or make a simple lunch.

My in-laws came for a week and, every day, had something planned. Without even asking, they would say, “All right, come on, we are going to the Boston Flower Show.” And they would load me and the baby into the car. And even though I was still a zombie, and still deeply depressed, they created an environment where I got out of the house and began to step back into life again.

No one asked me, “What help do you need?” No one asked me, “Do you want me to do the laundry?” No one asked me, “Do you want me to drop off dinner tonight?” They just did it. And that is an important note about people who are struggling.

Let Them doesn’t mean leave them alone.

When you are struggling, you don’t know what you want or what you need. Some days, you don’t even know what day it is. Have you ever noticed that when you ask a friend who is grieving, going through a breakup, or just got out of the hospital how you can help, they often say, “It’s okay, I’ll be fine,” “Nothing,” or “I don’t need anything.”

When you’re struggling, you don’t want to burden anyone else, because you already feel like a burden. Let Me create the environment they need to get better.

Here are some examples of things you can do: show up at their doorstep, drop off dinner, help them clean up their apartment, fill their fridge with healthy food, walk into their bedroom and pull the shades open and lift up the windows to let the air in, do their laundry, make a playlist of great songs, send them podcast episodes that will help give them hope, send them care packages filled with thoughtful and nurturing things, or buy them a digital picture frame and load up photos so in their environment they are constantly reminded of happy memories and people around them.

One of my favorite things to do, especially for a new mom, comes from therapist K.C. Davis: Drop off a tower of paper plates and cups so they don’t have to do the dishes while caring for a newborn.

And while we’re on the topic, call or text a friend and say, “I’m coming over on Saturday, and I’m taking the kids or the dog to the park to give you a break.”

Take your roommate to get manicures, or to a new exhibit at the museum, after her breakup. Text someone once a week and just say, “I’m thinking about you, you are not going to go through this alone, you do not need to text me back, I just want you to know I am always here.” Invite your friend who just got out of a treatment program to do a yoga class with you every Wednesday morning, and better yet, pick them up.

You can create an environment for positive change by offering therapy, cooking healthy meals, or having conversations, and focusing on open-ended questions. Can you see how these examples are very different from throwing money at a situation, or enabling or rescuing someone from their problems? These are all examples where you are making it easier to step back into life.

You never know what someone else is going through. You get to choose what kind of friend, loved one, or family member you get to be. In this book, we’ve talked a lot about showing up in a way that makes you proud of yourself.

When you help someone else, do it without expectation. Do it because it makes you feel good to reach out to that friend that’s in the hospital. Don’t do it because you hope to get a long text back updating you on what’s happening. Drop off dinner to someone who just had a baby, not because you are expecting a thank-you, but because it makes you feel good to know you show up for the people you love in life.

Remember that when someone is struggling they are often so overwhelmed they don’t have the energy to keep you updated or to remember to thank you—but trust that your kind gesture is making all the difference, whether you receive a thank-you or not.

Your job is to stand by their side and hold the light high. Be a beacon of hope. Believe in their ability to get better.

People avoid healing because they do not believe they can face the pain they are running from. So Let Them borrow their belief from you. Because when someone feels accepted, loved, and supported, it’s easier for them to believe in their ability to step back into life too.

So let’s summarize how to help someone who is struggling. In this section, you may have learned how you are preventing other adults from facing their struggles. The Let Them Theory teaches you that helping others doesn’t mean solving their problems for them—it means giving them the space and tools to do it themselves.

Problem: Rescuing people from their problems makes them drown in them. When you enable others with your money, words, and actions, you don’t foster their independence—you hinder their healing. You prolong their suffering, their debt, their breakdown, and in turn, your own.

Truth: People only heal when they are ready to do the work. You will be ready for them to heal before they are. While your intentions may be good, constantly stepping in to solve their issues creates dependency and frustration, and hinders their ability to take responsibility for themselves. You cannot want someone’s healing more than they do.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, you must step back and allow adults to face and feel the natural consequences of their actions. Instead of rescuing, offer support with conditions. This approach helps them take responsibility for their own healing and growth, and demonstrates your belief in their innate ability to get better and do better.



When you say Let Them, you trust and empower others to handle their difficulties while understanding that facing hardship is a necessary part of growth. When you say Let Me, you focus on providing support without taking over while creating the environment and tools necessary for another person to get better for themselves.

Believe in their ability to heal, and create an environment where change is possible.





Choosing the

Love You Deserve





CHAPTER 18



Let Them Show You Who They Are

At the end of your life, what are the very last words you want someone to say to you?

“I love you.”

Love is the most powerful force in the world. You deserve to feel loved, be loved, fall in love, express love, and experience one of the greatest joys in life: being in a loving relationship.

Whether you’re single, divorced, dating, engaged, in a situation-ship, or you’ve been married for a very long time, I believe the greatest love of your life is ahead of you. Even the best relationships can become more meaningful and your connection to someone can always go deeper.

If you’re single, your love story is far from over. The love of your life is not in your past. They are waiting for you in the future, and everything that has happened and every relationship you’ve been in has prepared you for what is about to happen next.

While I was doing the research for this book, I received so many questions about using the Let Them Theory when it comes to love. So, in the next three chapters, you and I will cover dating, commitment, how to know if a relationship is right for you, making love last, and surviving breakups.

Finally, we are going to talk about how you’ve been accepting less than the love you deserve.

The reality is, adults choose who and how they love, and sometimes they won’t choose you. People’s behavior tells the truth about how they feel about you. Too often, you chase love—or the potential for what you think it could be—and end up compromising on your values. By chasing love, you chase away the deep and meaningful relationship you’re worthy of.

As extraordinary as love is, it’s also the source of so much pain. You want to be loved so much that you can find yourself giving your power away to the other person.

For example, maybe some stranger you met online now dictates your mood. Maybe someone who ghosted you has now destroyed your self-esteem. Or your spouse is very dismissive and treats you like a roommate, which you have just learned to accept.

In your love life, you can fall into the trap of letting other people—and their own traumas and issues—make you compromise your standards and settle for far less than what you truly want and know you need.

When the heart is involved, logic goes out the window. You can find yourself explaining away bad behavior or creating a fantasy in your head instead of accepting reality. You can also convince yourself to stay in a relationship that isn’t working because it feels better than breaking up and facing the unknown.

You deserve an amazing love story, and you should never settle for less than that kind of love.

Using the Let Them Theory, you will learn the difference between chasing love and choosing it. You’ll learn who is worth a commitment and who isn’t. You’ll also learn how to use the theory to create the most loving, supportive, and committed partnership you have ever had.

The fact is, the best relationships grow and change over time—and changing how you show up will create connection and the loving partnership you truly deserve.





So, Let’s Start at the Beginning . . . How to Find Love


Dating today is really hard. I haven’t talked to a single person who says they like dating and that it’s easy and fun.

Absolutely everyone dreads the idea of “putting themselves out there,” getting on the apps, and entering what feels like a very toxic, shallow hookup scene. So if you feel discouraged, bummed, or insecure about being single, you’re not alone. This is normal, and it has a lot to do with the fact that dating apps and social media have turned love and relationships into a game, an industry, and a competition.

The other reason it’s frustrating is that so much of the advice feels like tricks, tips, and rules to win someone over, or secure the next date, or attract as many likes as you can on the app. That’s what I mean when I say that dating in today’s world feels like a competition. That is the worst way to approach the topic of love and committed partnerships. It is not a game. You’re not supposed to trick someone into liking you. You’re not supposed to follow rules about when you can text or what you can say.

You are supposed to be yourself and trust that if you show up as your full self, the person that is looking to be with someone as awesome as you can actually find you. Anybody that is telling you the trick to “landing them” is leading you away from yourself and into shallow waters where you’ll meet the wrong people. Instead of thinking you need to change yourself and start doing something different, I am going to teach you what you need to stop doing.

Finding love is more about saying no than it is about saying yes. When you have high standards for yourself and the kind of relationship you want, dating becomes a process of elimination. The Let Them Theory will keep you honest with yourself, and it will give you the courage to let other people reveal who they are while you stay true to yourself.

When you are brave enough to be yourself, you are in control—because you’re the one who is choosing who gets your time and energy, and who doesn’t.

It also takes bravery to see that someone’s not interested in you. It takes confidence to remind yourself that texting you is easy—but if they truly wanted to see you, they would be making plans.

The second you start creating excuses and scenarios in your head, you are giving your power to the other person. Dating requires you to be very black and white when it comes to other people’s behavior. And that is the hard part. Using the Let Them Theory, you’re going to learn how to choose the right relationship instead of constantly chasing the wrong ones.





The Purpose of Dating Is Not Just to Find “The One”


A big reason why dating is hard is that you don’t understand the true purpose of it. It’s not just to find “the one.” Dating helps you learn more about yourself and what you want and don’t want. One person at a time, you are learning what you like and what you don’t. That’s why every single experience that you have—even the really crappy ones—teaches you something important.

One of the most important lessons is learning what kind of behavior you will not accept, and what kind of person you truly want to be in a relationship with. If you become obsessed with finding the one, you are going to miss all the lessons that dating is trying to teach you about the value of love in your life.

You weren’t put on the earth to be somebody’s wife or husband. You are here to fulfill your dreams; share your story; and create a big, beautiful, amazing life.

No one else is going to create that life for you. The person you choose to love gets to share that life with you. That’s why I want you to be choosy.

When you’re dating, have fun and meet a ton of people, but never forget the bigger picture: that you’re looking for someone who is capable of helping you become your best self and co-creating a beautiful life together.

So, no. The purpose of dating is not just to find “the one.”

That’s why you need to think about dating as an opportunity to learn more about yourself by being open to lots of different experiences, that will ultimately lead to you choosing someone amazing who chooses you back.

The hard part is you can’t control whether or not another person chooses you. You can’t control whether or not the timing of your life lines up with the timing of someone else’s.

People choose who and how they love, and sometimes it won’t be you. But never forget: You get to choose who and how you love too. You get to choose who is worth your time and energy, and you get to choose how you want to be treated. Oftentimes with dating, the way you choose is by choosing to walk away when you aren’t being treated the way you deserve.

And that brings me to a fact: People’s behavior tells you exactly how they feel about you.

Your job isn’t to interpret it or second-guess it. Your job is to let people reveal who they are and how they truly feel about you and accept it. And by the way, this is true at every stage of a relationship.





The Early Days


As you put yourself out there and start meeting people, you may find there are lots of people you “like” and are “interested in” because there are lots of attractive, cool, and fun people out there.

The early days can be energizing and exciting. . . which is why you’ll probably end up saying yes to a lot of people who end up being wrong for you. It’s so easy to say yes when someone is attractive, or when you feel that rush of emotion, or you’ve got nothing else to do this weekend, or you’re tired of being single, or you’re scared you’ll never meet someone.

Dating is hard because everybody is so scared to be alone, and so desperate to find somebody and to have the fairy tale, that you’re not as discerning as you need to be about the reality of the situation you may be in with someone.

How many times have you convinced yourself that something is more serious than it is, or that this is going somewhere, or that the repeated drunken hookups mean they like you just as much as you like them, or that you have a future together?

There’s that famous saying, “If someone likes you, you’ll know, and if they don’t, you’ll be confused.” Feeling confused is a very dangerous place to be when you’re dating because if you like them, your knee-jerk reaction will be to convince yourself that they like you. Do NOT do that. Let Them confuse you.

Haven’t you noticed that the only people you feel confused by are the ones who don’t like you back? See the confusion that you feel for what it is. It means they don’t like you the way you want them to. When you convince yourself that something is happening when it’s clearly not, you’re chasing love. Chasing love only chases it away. Chasing the wrong person always leads you to the wrong places. Chasing the potential means you know something isn’t right and you’re ignoring the truth.

And here’s how you know you’re chasing it:

You’re the one that is always texting, calling, and reaching out. You believe the drunk hookups are leading somewhere special. You try to be near them all the time, hoping they will fall for you.

You believe what they tell you, even if their behavior tells you otherwise. You think with time this will get better. You think you know what’s best for them, and it’s you. You only see them when you are out at the bars. You believe you can fix them. You believe there is a text that you could send that might get them to want you back.

These are all examples of chasing the potential and choosing not to see the reality. You can’t get so attached to “making it work” that you keep chasing something that you know isn’t the right fit. It’s like taking a pair of shoes that you think are cute and trying to ram your foot into it even though it is two sizes too small. Your foot is not going to magically shrink, and just like the shoe isn’t going to grow to fit you, neither will this person shape-shift into who you hope they will be. That’s why you have to stop chasing.

The more time you waste chasing the wrong people, the longer it’s going to take you to find the right one. Let Them ghost you. Let Me move on.

Stop chasing the potential of who someone might be. Stop pouring your time and energy into people who do not give it back to you. Stop explaining away their disrespectful behavior. Stop giving your love to people who do not love you back. Stop making excuses for people who are clearly not interested in you. Stop chasing people who are not choosing to love you back. Stop playing the game.

Yes, dating is hard. Yes, your emotions are all over the place. Yes, rejection is painful.

Yes, the sex is awesome. Yes, they are hilarious. Yes, it is nice to not be the single one in your friend group. Yes, it feels great to have someone who seems interested. Yes, it is nice to have plans this weekend or something to look forward to. Yes, there will be times when the person seems right, but the timing is wrong.

Remember: You will find the right relationship by saying no to the wrong ones. The faster you say no, the faster you will be saying yes to the love of your life. The Let Them Theory will be revolutionary when it comes to finding the love you deserve, because it forces you to be brutally honest about the situation that you’re in, and who you’re dealing with, and how they actually feel about you.





They Don’t Like You. Wake Up.


The only way you learn who someone is and where you stand in their life is by watching their behavior. Forget what they say. Watch what they do. That can be hard to do, because in the beginning, your emotions and hormones are all over the place. They can cloud your ability to see the truth about how you’re being treated.

One question that you can always ask yourself to snap out of the dating fog is: If your best friend were being treated this way, what would you tell them?

One of the fundamental principles of the Let Them Theory is that people’s behavior tells you exactly where you stand in their life. You need to understand: This is very black and white. You are either a priority, or you are not. There is no middle ground.

Let Them show you who they are.

If you’re busy chasing someone, you will never allow yourself to see the reality that someone else doesn’t like you the way you want them to. If somebody is sending you mixed signals, it means they are NOT interested. Mixed signals aren’t “mixed” at all. They send a very clear message that you are not a priority; you’re a convenience.

For example, if they are texting you nonstop, but they never suggest a plan to get together, they are not interested in anything real. Let Them text nonstop. If they want to see you every time they are back in town, but never follow up whenever they leave, they are not interested in anything more than sex. Let Them. They aren’t the problem. You are. You are not valuing your time enough to realize that this is going nowhere.

You need the Let Me part of the theory: Let Me wake up and be honest with myself. The more I chase this person, the more time I spend texting this person, and the more I live in my head creating a fantasy that they are eventually going to come around and see that we are meant for each other, the less likely I am going to meet a person who wants a real relationship.

Let Me respect myself enough to admit that this is going nowhere. When someone is stringing you along, Let Them. You always have the power to cut the cord. You are an active participant in the stringing along, because you’re allowing them to do it. And if you were in a positive, loving relationship right now, you’d roll your eyes if they texted you for a hookup! So admit your part in your own demise right now, and take your power back.

Let Me remind myself that I don’t want to be dating someone who is not choosing me back. One of the most important signs of a healthy relationship is that it is mutual.

Mutual effort. Mutual respect. Mutual feelings. Mutual attraction. Mutual interest.

If you’re making excuses for someone else’s behavior. . . stop. Let Them reveal who they truly are. Let Them reveal whether or not they make an effort. Let Them reveal whether or not they care.

The biggest thing that makes dating confusing is your refusal to see the fact that they don’t care about you the way you wish they would. We’ve all been there. It’s painful when you are interested in someone and those feelings are not returned. But you can’t control who another person chooses to love.

Do not spend your time trying to shrink yourself into a tiny little box, or become someone new, or change who you are, just to be in a relationship with someone who doesn’t love you back. Don’t do it.

At the beginning of a relationship, it’s so easy to fall into this trap. It’s easy to jump straight to conclusions that this person is right for you (even if alarm bells are going off in your head that they’re not). It’s easy to blindly hope that people feel the same way you do. It’s easy to think someone will love you if you change just a little bit more. It’s easy to hold on tightly to the idea of being loved, even if it’s not quite as magical as you’d hoped. It’s easy to delude you into thinking they are not seeing anyone else even though they are not giving you a full commitment right now, or they “don’t like labels.” It’s easy to fall into an unfulfilling relationship just so that you can stop being the “single friend.” It’s easy in the moment, but in the long run, it’ll break your heart.

The emotional distress, the loss of self, the constant questioning of where you stand, the heartache over the fact that they will never quite commit. . . it’s never worth it. I want to say it again: If they like you, you’ll know. If they don’t, you’ll be confused.

Let Them not text you back. Let Them make promises when they are drunk. Let Them leave abruptly in the morning and never follow up on “I’d love to see you again.” Let Them confuse you, infuriate you, and send mixed signals.

You must let their behavior be the clear message. Letting Them is the easy part. Let Me is the hard part, because you don’t want to see the truth. Let Me see them for who they are. Let Me accept the truth in their behavior—I am not a priority. Stop choosing to chase people who clearly do not want to be with you.

If they are not making an effort, they are not worth yours.





CHAPTER 19



How to Take Your Relationship to the Next Level

“B ut, Mel. . . they are giving me the attention I deserve. I know they like me because they have told me. . . and they are acting in all the right ways. . . except for the most important one. They just don’t want to commit to me.”

This is really common, and it can show up in a number of ways: Maybe they don’t want to put a “label” on it, be exclusive, officially be in a relationship, move in together, get engaged, or get married.

First, you have to ask yourself, Is this a pattern of mine to chase people who won’t commit? Or is this just an issue with this one person? I am going to tackle these topics separately, because they are two different issues.





If You’re Always Picking the Wrong People


If you are always finding yourself trying to date the person who is unavailable or can’t commit, chances are it is not as coincidental as you think. You are probably attracted to people who you think you can change or win over, or who are unavailable because they are with someone else or just emotionally unavailable.

Ask yourself: Are you dating people who never commit? Are you the girlfriend before they meet their wife? Are you dating people you don’t fully trust? Are you dating people who are jealous or controlling? Do you keep sleeping with people hoping it turns into something? Are you dating people who have serious struggles whom you want to rescue? Are you dating people who cheat on you or that you meet by cheating? When your relationships ultimately blow up, do you tell your friends they were the “crazy” one?

If any of these things ring true, it’s time for honesty: You love the chase. This is your pattern and it’s a problem. The relationship is largely happening as a fantasy in your own mind, because you live in the potential of what could be, not in the reality of what is.

This pattern in your life will repeat unless you break it. Research shows that people subconsciously pick the same type of person to chase time and time again based on previous relationships and childhood experiences.

A study from the University of Alberta shows that after the initial “honeymoon phase,” a new relationship tends to follow the exact same dynamic patterns of old relationships. The eight-year study showed that people tend to repeat patterns, bring the same dynamics to new experiences, and avoid addressing their own issues. . . which, in turn, create the exact same broken relationship dynamics over and over.

If this is ringing true for you, you should really go talk to a therapist about your past, and get to the root of your issues—because they are not going to be solved by being in a relationship with someone else. In fact, if you chase another relationship, you will just keep chasing healthy love away.

Another relationship is not the answer. In fact another relationship right now is just going to make the problem worse.

You need to be single.

I am going to say that again. You need to be single.

If you truly want to fix this and create the healthy, loving relationship you’ve always dreamt about, you must be willing to be single for the next year and focus on figuring out how to be happy by yourself and to heal.

“But, Mel. . . I don’t want to be single, and I don’t think it’s that much of a problem. I just have met the wrong people. It’s not me. It’s them. I just need to pick someone different.”

Nope! The problem is you. I just realized, as I was saying this to you. . . that you’re going to think you’re the exception to this research.

Remember earlier in the book when you met Dr. Sharot from MIT, and she taught you why you can’t get other people to change? Because everyone thinks they are the exception, and that is happening to you right now.

If you have this pattern of chasing love, but never getting to a healthy commitment, you are not the exception. You are the problem. The biggest challenge you’re going to have is recognizing your own denial that this is in fact a pattern that you need to fix and that being in another relationship will keep you from fixing this problem.

You deserve an incredible love story, but you will not create it until you figure out the root cause of why you keep choosing people who are not healthy or won’t commit to you.

And I say this to you with love.

Now, let’s talk about using the Let Them Theory in situations where you are seeing someone or in a relationship, and you want to take it to the next level, but you are not sure where the other person stands or how to broach the topic of a bigger commitment without losing your power.





The Commitment Conversation


There comes a time in any relationship where you may wonder where this is going or if you are on the same page about what you want. The second you start to feel that way, it’s time for a conversation.

Never feel bad about asking for what you deserve. Never hint about something as important as a commitment. Being able to have honest conversations is the foundation of a loving and healthy relationship.

So don’t fear this, embrace it. If the relationship is meant to be, this conversation will make it stronger. A real conversation only destroys something that is fake.

The way you’re going to frame the conversation comes from my friend Matthew Hussey, a New York Times bestselling author who has been helping people for more than 17 years to feel more confident and in control of their relationships. His YouTube channel is #1 in the world for love advice, with over half a billion views.

As I was researching this book, I spoke to Matthew about the mistakes that people make when they want to take a relationship to the next level.

And he told me a very poignant personal story. He said that when he met his wife, Audrey, he was dating a bunch of people; they were also living in different cities, and it was very casual. He admitted to me (while Audrey was sitting right next to us) that he was stringing her along. That is. . . until she sat him down and had a conversation that was structured in a very particular way, and it caught him completely off guard.

She didn’t make him feel bad. She didn’t go on and on about how much she liked him, or that she was falling for him. In fact, she didn’t focus on him at all. She focused on the value of her time and what she was looking for.

As Matthew told me the story, he said that the #1 mistake that people make when they are trying to take something to the next level is focusing on the other person, rather than focusing on the value of their time and what they want in life. And it worked—because he stopped dating everybody else, and immediately committed to Audrey, and now they are married and partners in business together.

He walked me through what he learned from the experience, how he now teaches this technique, and the way you can frame this conversation too. So here’s what you’re going to do:

Similar to the ABC Loop, don’t have this conversation at a bar, on the phone, or when you’re short on time. Don’t even consider having it over text. It’s important to not walk into this with any expectation that the person is going to be wanting the same thing that you do. You’re seeking clarification because you’ve gotten to a point where you know that if this isn’t going anywhere, it’s no longer worth your time.

This isn’t about getting the answer that you want. It’s about getting the truth about where you stand. This isn’t a particularly emotional conversation. It’s about the facts of what is worth your time, and what is not. This is what Matthew recommended, but make it your own:

I have really loved spending time with you. And I know myself, and I’m really looking for a commitment. I wanted to talk to you because I want to see if we both have the same vision for where this is going. I value my time and energy, and I don’t want to put time and energy into spending time with someone if it’s not going to go to the next level. And I’ve reached that point with you. It’s been really fun. I love spending time with you. But I only want to invest more time and energy if we’re going to go to the next level. And if you don’t see the same thing, this has been great. But I just know myself and I need to choose to invest the time that I have with people who want the same things that I want.



Wow. I wish I had known this when I was dating. What strikes me about Matthew and Audrey’s approach is how matter of fact it is.

As you read it, don’t you respect the person who is saying it? That they “value” their time and energy? And did you also notice, they were super complimentary of the person they had been seeing?

No guilt trip. No accusations. No sob story. Just two adults having fun, and now one of them is being clear about what they want in life.

Don’t you respect that? I sure do. Don’t you want to value your time just as much? Of course you do! And don’t you want to be with somebody who is so badass that they value their time this much, and actually mean it?

And, did you notice zero expectation? The door is wide open for the other person to say no.

This is the hard part: Sometimes the people you choose aren’t going to choose you back. It will suck. You will feel demoralized. And you’ll be okay.

And here’s the thing, even if they say no, you still get to choose what you do after.

If they tell you—I don’t want to move in with you; I don’t want to be your boyfriend or girlfriend; I don’t want to do long distance; I don’t want to get married; I don’t want to ever have kids; I am not moving back to your hometown—they have given you everything that they have to give you. And this is it.

Let Them.

As my friend and bestselling author Pastor Sarah Jakes Roberts likes to say, “Are these table scraps what you’re willing to accept, or are you looking for a five star meal?”

If you choose to stay in this after they’ve told you they don’t want the same things you want, that’s on you. If you stay in something after they won’t commit, the next phone call should be to your therapist, because there is something deeper going on.

As your friend, I’ll ask you: Why do you want to be with somebody that won’t commit to you? Why do you want to be with somebody that doesn’t want the same things that you want?

Yes, it can be terrifying to be alone. Yes, it’s deflating to know another six months just went by. Yes, it’s tempting to be with the table scraps rather than back on the dating market again.

You may think you’ll never find love. You may think you’ll never find someone as smart, funny, attractive, complimentary, or as good in bed. But, you’re wrong. It’s not true.

Do not accept the table scraps.

Be brave. Saying no to the wrong situations is how you find the right person for you. Let Them reveal who they are, and where you stand. Then you must focus on the second part of the Let Them Theory, Let Me.

Let Me end a relationship with someone who won’t commit.

Let Me trust this is another step in the direction of choosing the love I deserve.

Let Me stop chasing the potential of this and see the reality.

Let Me believe that I just took one step closer to the right person.

Let Me take my power back, because the love of my life is right around the corner.





CHAPTER 20



How Every Ending Is a Beautiful Beginning

One topic that kept coming up when I was researching this book was how to know when the issues you are facing in a relationship are something that you can resolve versus something that you need to accept.

When is overthinking, frustration, and bickering normal, and when is it a sign that something is broken? When should I just Let Them be versus admitting the painful truth that this relationship is no longer working for me?

Having been married for almost 30 years, I can tell you that mutual give and take and compromise are critical to a successful relationship. No one is perfect, no relationship is perfect, and every relationship changes with time.

In a long-term partnership, there will be periods in your relationship that are amazing, and there will be times that are extremely difficult. But every couple that has made a relationship work has had two important things present:

First, they both wanted the relationship to work. And they were both willing to do the work to make it better. Second, the issues that created problems did not require either person to give up their dreams or compromise their values.

So if you’re sitting here wondering if you’re in the right relationship, that’s a good thing because it means you want to be with somebody that is going to bring out the best in you, and who will work with you to create a good life.

One of the hardest things that I’ve experienced is being with someone who is a really good person, and knowing deep down that they are not the right person for me.

Or, in a couple cases, being with a really good person and knowing that I was in the wrong place mentally and not the right person for them—in fact, I had no business being in a relationship at all. (I am thinking about the apologies I’ve made to my college and law school boyfriends. I was in a horrible place mentally in my 20s, and boy did I behave in ways I deeply regret.)

Admitting that a relationship is not working is one of the hardest things in the world to do, especially if you’re in love with them. Often, it’s not that obvious what the issue is. Deep down you just know that underneath the day-to-day, and the familiar routine together, something feels off.





Love the Person, Not Their Potential


Any time you find yourself questioning whether or not this is the right relationship for you, ask yourself: Can you accept this person exactly as they are, and exactly where they are, and still love them?

That means, do you truly love your boyfriend, girlfriend, wife, husband, or partner for who they are right now? Or do you love who they once were, or who you wish they would become?

Even if there are specific things that bother you, in the end they might not be deal breakers. They may be things you have to learn to accept, and that’s just work you’re going to have to do to make this relationship thrive.

Let Them.

For example, maybe you can’t stand that they’ve started vaping, they don’t take care of themselves, they are such a slob it is driving you crazy, they don’t plan anything, the sex is boring when it happens, they never want to do anything, or they are not interested in moving to a new city or traveling to a new country on vacation.

Can you still love them despite all these things? Because, the reality of it is. . . they may never change. And here is the other thing, they probably won’t.

Remember, one of the fundamental takeaways from this book: People only do what they feel like doing. Yes, you can influence them. But if you keep wanting them to change, and they don’t, it not only weakens your love. It creates resentment.

What I have noticed with couples is that the longer you are together, the more you want your partner to be like you. That’s not fair. So be honest with yourself. Do you just want them to be just like you, or is it that one of your fundamental needs in the relationship is not being met? This is very important because based on the laws of human nature you should assume the person is never going to change.

Let Them be. Instead of sitting there silently resenting them or criticizing them behind their back, be the loving and mature person in the relationship. Either stop trying to make them like you, and accept them as they are, or have the productive and loving conversation about what you need, and why this is bothering you.

Maybe they don’t even know you’re upset by it, or they don’t know how you feel about the issue, or they don’t know how important it is to you, or they do know, but you have just created a standoff.

So before you spend another year overthinking and wondering if this is your person, have the conversation, apply the science, and then sit back and wait. You know how to do this using the ABC Loop and the power of your influence:

A: APOLOGIZE, then ASK open-ended questions.

B: BACK OFF, and observe their BEHAVIOR.

C: CELEBRATE progress while you continue to model the CHANGE.

When you use Let Me to influence someone else, do it with the hope that they change, because you love them and want something better for them, and you want the relationship to work and this matters to you. But don’t ever do it with the expectation that they must change.

Because even when you use science to influence someone else, they are still their own person and are in control of what they choose to think, say, and do. Give it at least three months without any negative energy, while you keep modeling the positive change and celebrating anything you see.

Let Them be.

Why three months? It’s plenty of time for your energy to shift and for the other person to suddenly feel inspired to make the change and believe it was their idea.

Remember the example of my friend and her husband. This issue of his health had been bothering her for a while, and even though she loves her husband, it’s made her wonder if he is the right person for her? Can she be married to someone who doesn’t take care of themselves?

So she’s been using the Let Them Theory to answer this question. She is letting him be, and meanwhile, she’s been going for a walk every morning, she’s been positive and happy, she’s been complimenting him and hugging him, and she’s been very affectionate whenever he exercises.

And now she has to wait. One of the hardest parts about waiting, and just letting them be, is that moment when your loved ones complain about the natural consequences of their behavior.

Like how much money they have spent on vaping. (But they are still vaping). Or how much they hate their job. (But they haven’t looked for a new one). Or how depressed they feel. (But they refuse to go to therapy.)

My friend shared that her husband was complaining the other day that he was so winded during pickleball that he had to step out of the game with his friends.

When that happens, your tendency is to want to reassure someone. Don’t do it. Let their complaint hang in the air. Don’t respond.

Let Them sit with it. Say nothing. Let Them experience their feelings. Let the silence do the work for you. Let Them feel the consequences of their actions. Let Them.

And then, Let Me use science. Ask them an open-ended question. “It sounds like it bothers you?” “Is there anything you want to do about it?”

As you’ve already learned from Dr. K, these open-ended questions are what researchers call motivational interviewing. It makes your partner reflect on the conflict between what they truly want to change in their life and their current behavior, and what they don’t.





The Deal Breaker Decision


But. . . what happens if you follow the ABC Loop, and you wait patiently for three months, and nothing changes?

It means that your partner doesn’t feel like changing. Their behavior tells you that. So, you have a choice. Because you always have power if you focus on your response. You’ve followed ABC. Now it’s time for you to move to the next two parts: D and E.





THE ABC (DE) LOOP





Step D: DECIDE if this is a DEAL BREAKER or not.


If after three months, the person hasn’t changed or hasn’t tried to change, assume they aren’t going to. And, I’m sorry that I have to be the one to tell you this, but they’re not ready. They don’t want to do it. Doing it for you is not enough. It’s not a priority of theirs, or maybe there is something deeper going on, and they are not capable of changing.

Or maybe they are just the way they are, and that’s okay. Their behavior is their answer and they have made it clear.

Let Them. Not everyone wants to change. Sometimes in life, the most loving thing you can do is to stop fixing, start accepting, be more loving, and focus on what you can control.

And what you can control is choosing to love someone as they are.

I know it’s not fair. I know it’s disappointing. I know it’s frustrating and sometimes even devastating that someone won’t change for you. Let Them be.

Now it’s time for the second part of the theory, Let Me. It’s time to decide if this is a deal breaker for YOU. Because remember, you always get to choose who and how you love.

You can choose whether or not this is a deal breaker. A deal breaker is something you can’t live with for the rest of your life. Here’s how you figure that out.

Ask yourself: Could you be with this person for the rest of your life if they never, ever change?

Whether the answer is yes or no, move to Step E because something needs to end for this relationship to get better.





Step E: END your bitching or END the relationship.


You are at the point where they are not changing. You are in a standoff on the issue and you can either live with this or you can’t. You have to choose to end your bitching or end the relationship.

Can you stop complaining about this issue, for real? Can you stop griping to yourself, holding it over their head, and acting in a passive-aggressive way and complaining to your friends?

If you’re going to choose them, you owe it to them and to yourself to choose them exactly as they are. Take my marriage. My ADHD drives Chris crazy, and I understand why. I am a disaster a lot of the time.

I’ll leave my dishes in the sink or stacked on my desk, I constantly misplace my keys, my stuff is all over my side of the bathroom sink, and anytime we are going somewhere I’m late.

Chris is usually sitting in the car patiently waiting for me while I run around the house like a lunatic looking for something I can’t find. . . and this is just the tip of the disorganized iceberg that is Mel Robbins.

Over the years, Chris has sat me down. We’ve had countless conversations about it. How I leave dirty tissues on the counter and forget to throw them in the trash. (“It’s disgusting, Mel.”) Or how frustrated he gets when I am distracted and scrolling on Instagram. (“Are you even listening to me right now?”)

And I know that my behavior makes him feel like I don’t respect his time or care how my chaos impacts him.

I have tried to change. I want to change. I work on it. And it still hasn’t happened. I am late. I lose everything. I make messes around the house and don’t clean them up. I hate this about myself. I wish I could snap my fingers and change this aspect of who I am.

Chris is on time. Organized. Calm. Predictable. Always has been. Always will be. Chris would like me to be more like him. His life would be easier. He’d feel more supported and respected by me.

But relationships are about learning how to love someone for who they are, not for who you wish they could be. When you start using the Let Them Theory, you’ll learn to see other people as they are, and then you’ll see that it’s up to you to figure out what you can accept and what you can’t. That’s how you hold on to your power. It’s always in your response.

At the same time, as you let go of the surface-level stuff that is never going to change, you’ll probably start to see the deeper things you have been taking for granted. For instance, while there is a lot about Chris that used to annoy me, one of the things I value most about my husband is how kindhearted, dependable, and peaceful he is. I never knew I “needed” that in a relationship. He, on the other hand, values my wild enthusiasm, fierce loyalty, and sense of humor.

It’s why, as much as my behavior frustrates him, it is not a deal breaker. Chris has decided that everything else that I provide as his partner trounces the annoyances created by my ADHD.

Chris has accepted the fact that I will be like this for the rest of my life. And learned to both laugh, and live with it. Let Mel be. . . Mel.

That’s why the Let Them Theory has made my marriage stronger. It’s taught me how to accept Chris for who he is, and stop complaining about who he isn’t. . . and vice versa.

You’ll discover the exact same clarity in your own relationships. For my friend and her husband, this may mean that when she wakes up to hit the Peloton in the basement, she lets him sleep in. And that means being super quiet when she gets dressed, instead of slamming the bedroom door like she used to.

I share this example because loving someone as they are goes beyond ending your bitching. You demonstrate through your behavior that you do love them as they are. You lead with kindness and consideration.





Are You Actually Compatible with Your Partner?


Earlier, I asked you the question: Could you be with this person for the rest of your life if they never, ever change?

And what if your answer is: “I don’t know” or “no?”

If you can’t truly end your bitching, then you can’t accept the other person and love them as they are.

That’s not a very kind and loving thing to do. And if you can’t stop slamming the door in the morning, or being passive-aggressive when they are running late yet again, that’s not kind either.

Whether or not you end a relationship is a deeply personal decision that only you can make. In the case of my friend and her spouse, it’s not a hard call. His unhealthy habits are not a deal breaker. Not even close. She loves him.

She knows that to make the relationship work, she has to work harder at accepting him and changing how she shows up in the relationship. She needs to bring more compassion and kindness to their dynamic. She can keep trying to influence him, but the expectations have to go, along with any complaining. This is about her, not about him.

And because he’s not changing who he is, she needs to change who she has been in order for this relationship to be better.

But what most people are struggling with when they ask questions about using the Let Them Theory to determine whether they are with the right person are issues of compatibility. There’s a difference between being committed to someone, and being compatible with them.

It is very common to fall in love with someone and experience what feels like the most incredible relationship of your entire life—and then over time the two of you start to grow in different directions, want different things, or realize that you’ve become different people.

This is incredibly hard when it happens, because you haven’t fallen out of love. You just don’t quite fit like you used to. I said that two things are required to make a relationship go the distance:

Both people want the relationship to work and are both willing to work on it to make it better.

The issues that create problems do not require either person to give up their dreams or compromise their values.



You may be in a situation where you both want the relationship to work, and you’re both willing to do the work. When there’s a problem with compatibility, no matter how hard you work at the relationship, there’s a high chance it still might not work.

It’s one of the saddest and hardest things to come to terms with when it happens, and it’s a deeply personal choice.

For example, let’s say you’re in love with and committed to someone who is British and wants to move back home to London, but you’ve always envisioned staying close to your family in Atlanta.

Or another example that comes up a lot: One of you wants children, and the other doesn’t.

You may talk about it. You may fight about it. You understand the reason why your partner wants to move back home to Europe and they understand why you don’t. You’ve discussed the pros and cons of having children but never seem to come to agreement on your future. You’ve gone around and around on the topic. In the past, you have said, “We don’t need to decide this now.”

But now has come, and you’re at an impasse.

They want to move. You don’t.

You want children. They don’t.

You’re committed to each other, absolutely. . . but you might not be compatible right now.

How do you know this is truly a deal breaker?

Here’s how you figure that out. Let’s take the situation where you are in love with someone who has always wanted to move back home to London. And you have always envisioned being close to your family in the United States.

You ask yourself: Will you regret breaking up with them more than moving to London with them? If you agree to move, will you resent your partner if you choose to leave your family and friends behind?

Both choices come with heartbreak.

One requires you to give up on a dream you’ve had about living close to your family. The other requires you to leave the person who has been, until now, the love of your life.

And by the way, your partner is facing the exact same heartbreak because they won’t compromise either. Your partner is not changing. They are moving to London. With or without you. Let Them.

And now, Let Me make a choice. Am I willing to compromise to be in this relationship?

The fact is, 69 percent of the problems in your relationship are not resolvable. This statistic comes from 40 years of scientific research conducted by Drs. John and Julie Gottman, the most famous relationship researchers on the planet (who also happen to be married).

They’ve found that the #1 issue that couples fight about is things that will never change: Like how someone runs late, or isn’t as ambitious as you would like, or they spend every weekend in front of the TV, or their hobbies are different from yours, or they are messy, or they are a homebody, or they have different political opinions.

These are all examples of the 69 percent of the problems in your relationship that are not resolvable. That’s why it is on you to figure out what you value at the deepest level. Is this something you can compromise on if your partner won’t?

For some people, moving wouldn’t be a big deal. They’d jump at the chance to move overseas with the love of their life.

Dr. John Gottman’s research says that if you are constantly fighting about the same stuff and going around and around, it’s probably because of a profound difference between your and your partner’s personalities and your deepest hopes and dreams.

In other words, you value different things, and you have a different vision for how you want to live day-to-day and what you want to experience in your life. According to Dr. Gottman, almost all gridlock in your relationship comes from “unfulfilled dreams.”

Take the couple fighting about moving to London, or the couple in disagreement over having kids. These are big issues. That’s why you can’t let it go. It’s tied to a deeper vision that you have about your life. It’s a very personal decision that you’re going to need to make.

Moving to London seems like something that is worthy of compromising on. But if you’ve always wanted kids, you’re going to regret wasting a decade with someone only to wake up in your mid-40s and realize this was something you truly wanted—and that now it’s not going to happen.

Ask yourself, is this going to require me to give up on a dream? Because according to the Gottmans, if it does, that’s a problem.





Is There Someone Better?


I’ve also noticed in my research that there are a lot of you in long-term committed relationships who wonder: Is there someone better out there?

The answer is, you’ll never know.

I personally believe this worry is something that dating culture, social media, and romantic comedies have put into your head. There is no perfect person. Everyone has past issues. Everyone has baggage. And the older you get, the more baggage you have.

Most people haven’t dealt with it. Only you know whether you don’t appreciate what’s right in front of you, or if you see everything in your life as half empty. You may think the grass is always greener somewhere else.

The fact is, the grass is greener where you water it.

That brings me back to the two things that are required to make a long-term relationship work:

Both people want the relationship to work and are both willing to work on it to make it better.

The issues that create problems do not require either person to give up their dreams or compromise their values.



At some point, you just have to choose. And that might mean choosing what is right in front of you.

As someone who has been married almost 30 years, I assure you every single couple has faced some really dark and scary times in their relationships. And for the couples who chose to lean in and work together through their issues, struggles, and challenges, not a single one of them regrets it.

But I know a lot of people who have gotten divorced and have a nagging regret that they wish they had worked a little harder to make it work and had the courage to face their issues sooner.

Maybe if they would have had the hard conversations and gone to therapy, things would have turned out differently. Because, even if it didn’t end up keeping them together, it would have made the process of breaking up—and the aftermath of separating with kids involved—a hell of a lot better.

Ending a relationship is a very personal and difficult choice, especially when you wish it would work. It might mean choosing to believe in that deep intuition inside of you that something about this just doesn’t quite fit.

You know it, you’ve just been terrified to admit it to yourself. Sometimes you have to end things before they end you. If you know what your dreams are in life, you deserve and need relationships that support you in achieving them. If you stay with someone who doesn’t share the same hopes and dreams that you have. It will make you both miserable.

And look, it’s easy for me to write that in a book. And it’s easy for me to say, Let Them go. But there is nothing easy about breaking up with someone you still love.

That’s when more than ever, you’re going to be grateful that you have the Let Them Theory to help you get through it.





Surviving Heartbreak


I want to speak directly to you or someone you love who is going through heartbreak.

This will be one of the hardest things you ever experience. And you will get through this.

The worst thing someone can say to you when a relationship has just ended is that you should focus on “loving yourself.” That is the world’s worst advice, because when you’re going through heartbreak, you often hate yourself.

You question everything. You wonder if you’ll ever find love again. You want your old life and you wish you could go back to the way things were. You want what you used to have. It feels like your heart is shattering, because it is.

What you’re feeling is grief. The life you thought you were going to live has died. Just like the experience of losing a loved one, when you go through heartbreak, you will experience all the same stages of grief. And it’s going to consume you. For days, and weeks, even months, you’ll think of the person nonstop.

You’ll have to resist the urge all day, every day, to text, or call, or listen to their voice memos, or look at the photos, or check their location, or watch their stories online.

I was speaking to my therapist, Anne, about this, and she explained that:

It hurts so deeply because everything about them is intertwined in your nervous system. They have been a part of you and you have been a part of them for a long time. It is why you can still feel their presence and you can hear their voice. You are so used to talking to them every day, and so you naturally want to reach out. Yes, you miss them but your nervous system always misses them and the ways in which they’ve become intertwined with your experience of life. This is normal.



She was explaining the neurological, physiological, and neurochemical aspect of what it feels like to experience heartbreak. As you walk down the street, or you drive in your car, you’ll imagine that they are there next to you. As you have a thought, you can almost hear what they would say back to you. If something good happens, you’ll feel yourself wanting to share it with them. If something changes in your family, you’ll wish you could tell them.

It’s not just your heart that is breaking, it’s all of these patterns in your life. It’s the circuitry in your body. It’s your nervous system. It’s the thoughts in your mind. It’s the images in your heart. It’s the songs you used to listen to. When you get dressed for work, when you climb into bed at the end of the day and wake up alone in the morning, they will be on your mind.

You’ll live in fear and in hope of bumping into them. You’ll watch their life play out in pictures from far away. You’ll be terrified of the day that you learn they’ve met someone else. The hardest part about a breakup is that you have to go through it.

There is no avoiding it. You experience it in every cell of your body because you must unlearn what it was like to be with them, and learn how to live your life again without them. This is why so many people hold on for so long.

Let Them will not make this easy. Let Them will not remove the pain. My therapist Anne has a rule of thumb when it comes to heartbreak. No contact for 30 days. The reason is that any contact at all—seeing a photo, hearing their voice—will activate all the old patterns in your nervous system, and will really force you to take a step back in your process of unlearning life with this person.

This is the hard part. And you’re going to be in the thick of it for at least three months. That is how long the research says it takes to grieve a breakup before you’ll start to feel a little better.

By the 11-week mark, 71 percent of people feel better. I offer that as a benchmark to give you some comfort that, yes, it will get better. It may get better in 11 days. It may get better in 11 weeks. It may take a little longer. But it will get better.

The Let Them Theory will help you move through this, learn from it, and come through it stronger and more connected to yourself and what you want and deserve in your life. But, while you’re in this first part, you just need to allow yourself to be in it. Let Me.

Let Me grieve. Let Me cry in my bed for days. Let Me tell the story over and over of how it ended. Let Me resist reaching out. Let Me be in a depressive state.

All this sadness is a mentally healthy response to heartbreak. And when you’re ready, there are a couple of things that, based on the research, will help you accept that the relationship is over and that it’s time for you to pick up the pieces of your life and move forward.

Here are a few recommendations for how you can get started on settling your nervous system and moving through this breakup in a healthier way—because it is not time that heals. It is what you do with that time that matters:





1. Remove all environmental triggers.


Take every visible reminder—trinkets, shirts, pictures—and get them out of sight. The patterns of this person are so hardwired in your body and mind that simply seeing things that remind you of them keeps you from moving forward. You don’t need to burn things. You can just put them in a box and come back to them when you have time, space, and distance from all this emotion.





2. Give your bedroom a small makeover.


Chances are, you spent a lot of time together in your bedroom. Giving your bedroom a refresh really helps signal that a new chapter is beginning. Paint a wall or get that cool removable wallpaper. Get new sheets and a new comforter. Move your furniture around. It really helps.





3. Reach out to friends, siblings, cousins, and co-workers.


There is an empty space that this person left that needs to be filled. You need support, so ask for it. There is nothing to be embarrassed about. Everyone has gone through a breakup and understands how horrible it can be. Ask people to check in on you over the next few months and invite you to go for a walk or have dinner so you get out of your house.





4. Fill your calendar.


Look up events in your area and buy tickets so you’re committed to go see an exhibit or go see a friend out of town. Reach out to friends and make plans so that you don’t see an empty calendar, but you are experiencing a busy one. The distraction really helps. Nothing is worse for a breakup than an idle mind. If you don’t have things to keep you busy, you will busy yourself by thinking about them.





5. Pick a challenge you have always wanted to do.


Whether it’s a mountain you’ve wanted to climb, a triathlon you never had time to train for, a class you’ve always wanted to take, or even learning the guitar, this is the perfect time. Choose this challenge for yourself so that you are doing something for yourself that you are proud of. There is no better feeling.





6. Keep asking yourself this question.


If you knew the love of your life was around the corner and this breakup was bringing you one step closer to meeting them, how would you spend your nights and weekends while you are single?

One of the biggest fears when people go through a breakup is they will be alone forever and never find someone as good as the person that just walked out the door. That’s not true, and being intentional about how you want to spend your time being single signals to your brain that you actually do believe that you won’t be single forever—and that you better make the best out of this time right now.

One other thing: Don’t do a revenge diet.

It’s a huge mistake to use a heartbreak as an excuse to lose weight or get jacked at the gym or somehow make yourself more attractive with the hope of winning your ex back or rubbing it in their face as you get hot. Don’t do that. It means you are still chasing your ex and they are still very much part of your day-to-day motivation.

If you want to go to the gym and get back into shape for yourself, fantastic. If you want to take care of yourself and prioritize healthier habits, amazing. But don’t do it for them. Do it for you.

Most of all. . . give it time.

Time doesn’t heal all wounds. What you do with your time does. No matter how busy you get, or how much better you start to feel, it will take time to process everything that happened. Let it take time. . . because it will take time. Often, it takes a LOT of time. But if you keep waking up every day and taking a step forward, one of these days you’re going to wake up and realize that you’re not only feeling better—you are better.





You Are the Love of Your Life


As you’ve navigated through the challenges of love, heartbreak, and everything in between, it’s important to pause and recognize a fundamental truth: A relationship doesn’t make you worthy of love. Your existence does. You will spend your entire life from the day you are born to the day you die with only one person: you. You are the only love of your life.

Throughout this book, we’ve focused on your relationships with other people. How to stop making other people a problem, and how to transform your relationships into the greatest sources of joy, meaning, and connection. But there’s one relationship that underpins them all, and it’s the one you have with yourself.

Whether you’re single, dating, married, or healing from heartbreak, the power to create incredible relationships is already within you. The Let Them Theory has taught you how to navigate the complexities of human interactions, how to let others be who they are, and how to reclaim your power by choosing how you show up. But now, it’s time to apply everything you’ve learned to the most important relationship you will ever have: the one with yourself.

Let Them be them, so you can finally Let Me be me.

You’ve learned that other people can be one of the greatest sources of happiness, better health, support, love, and connection. You deserve all that and more. You deserve relationships that elevate you, that nourish your soul, and that reflect the love and respect you have for yourself. But here’s the key: The foundation of these incredible relationships lies in how you treat yourself.

Are you respecting your own boundaries? Are you showing yourself the compassion and kindness you offer to those you love? Are you allowing yourself to pursue your dreams without waiting for someone else’s approval?

You are the only person you are guaranteed to spend the rest of your life with. This isn’t a cliché; it’s a reality. So, what kind of relationship do you want to have with yourself? I’m not going to tell you to go love yourself in some superficial way. But I am going to tell you that you have a choice—a choice to prioritize your needs, your desires, and your happiness.

This isn’t about becoming self-centered or shutting others out. It’s about recognizing that the love, respect, and care you give yourself set the standard for every other relationship in your life. When you stop chasing validation from others and start choosing to honor yourself, you send a powerful message to the world about how you deserve to be treated.

You don’t need anyone else’s permission to be happy, to pursue your passions, express yourself more, or to live the life you’ve always dreamed of. The only permission you need is your own. You’ve spent enough time waiting for others to give you what you crave—whether it’s love, acceptance, or approval. But the truth is, everything you’re looking for starts with you.

The Let Them Theory is more than just a tool for navigating relationships with others; it’s a guide for how to treat yourself with the love, respect, and kindness you deserve. Let them be who they are. But more importantly, let yourself be who you truly are.

Let Me prioritize my own happiness.

Let Me pursue my dreams with passion.

Let Me set boundaries that protect my peace.

Let Me choose relationships that uplift and inspire me.

Let Me love myself enough to walk away when it no longer works.

This isn’t about waiting for the right partner, the right friend, or the right opportunity to come along. It’s about recognizing that you are the source of your own happiness, your own fulfillment, and your own joy. When you truly embrace that, everything else falls into place.

So, as you turn the page and move forward, remember this: You are the love of your life. And the life you create—full of meaningful relationships, joy, and fulfillment—begins with how you choose to love yourself. Let Me.

Now, let’s wrap this up and remind ourselves of the incredible journey you’ve just taken. You’ve learned, you’ve grown, and you’ve discovered that the power to create the life and love you deserve has always been within you. And you learned throughout this section about how to best show up for yourself and choose the love you deserve.

Until today, you’ve been accepting less than the love you deserve. The Let Them Theory empowers you to recognize your worth, let go of those who don’t treat you well, and focus on finding someone who truly deserves you.

Problem: You’re accepting less than the love you deserve. You’re chasing people who won’t commit, or pouring time into people who don’t love you back, or refusing to accept the person that you’re with and learn how to love them as they are. Other people do not hold the power in your relationships, you do. It’s time to show up differently.

Truth: Relationships are about learning how to love someone for who they are, not for who you wish they could be. In dating, this means letting people reveal who they are through their behavior. In relationships, this means accepting people as they are, and not punishing them because they are not who you want them to be. It also means having the hard conversations and making the hard decisions when someone can’t be who you want them to be.

Solution: Using the Let Them Theory, you’ll see that loving relationships are your responsibility to create, and your power is in accepting people’s behavior at face value and changing how you show up. It is then that you open yourself up to attracting the love you truly deserve and showing up differently in your existing relationships, so that deeper love is possible. Welcome to your metamorphosis.



When you say Let Them, you accept people as they are, and you accept their behavior as the truth. When you say Let Me, you choose how love shows up in your life.

Stop chasing love and start choosing it.





CONCLUSION



Your Let Me Era Is Here

You and I have spent a lot of this book talking about others: their opinions, their emotions, and the ways their actions annoy, anger, frustrate, or disappoint you. But this book isn’t really about other people. It’s about you.

If you think it’s about them, you’ve missed the point. If you still think other people are the problem, you need to go back and read this entire book again. The truth is simple: YOU hold the power. And YOU are the one who has been giving it away.

Imagine standing beneath a sky that’s constantly shifting—sometimes clear and blue, other times filled with clouds, or rumbling with storms. You’ve spent so much time and energy trying to keep that sky clear, wishing away the clouds, hoping for endless sunshine. But the sky doesn’t care what you want. It will do what it does, with or without your input.

The breakthrough moment comes when you realize this: The sky’s beauty isn’t diminished by the presence of clouds or storms. In fact, it’s the variety, the unpredictability, that makes it truly magnificent. The storms highlight the calm; the clouds make the sun more precious. The same is true for your life.

You’ve been trying to control the uncontrollable, trying to force the world to conform to your expectations. But what if, instead, you focused on your own response to whatever the world throws your way? You can’t change the weather. But you can change how it impacts you.

No matter what happens around you, you decide how it will affect you.

You decide if a comment from a loved one destroys your self-esteem or rolls off your back. You decide if all the bad dates you’ve been on cause you to lower your standards or become even more discerning. You decide if someone else’s success makes you quit or inspires you to work even harder.

It’s that simple. You have the power.

This realization is like finally understanding the true nature of the sky. The clouds that once frustrated you are now seen as part of a larger, ever-changing masterpiece. The storms that once frightened you are now moments of power and beauty, teaching you resilience and strength. You start to see that the sky’s unpredictability is what makes it so magnificent, so endlessly fascinating.

Think about that for a moment. The sky will do what it does—clouds will gather, storms will come, and the sun will shine when it pleases. You can’t control it, but you can control how you navigate beneath it. You can carry an umbrella; you can dance in the rain; you can chase the sun when you need to.

The people and situations around you are like the weather. The fact is, you can never control other people—how they think, how they act, whether or not they love you, or how fast they check you out at the grocery store.

So why on earth would you ever give them the level of control over you that you have been?

Why would you ever entrust something as precious as your confidence, your peace of mind, your happiness, and your dreams to the whims and moods of the people around you?

If you don’t use Let Them, you are allowing yourself to be impacted by the worries, actions, insecurities, and opinions of others. If you don’t use Let Me, you are leaving the things you want in life up to chance.

Ask yourself, and I mean really ask yourself: If all the energy and time you spent resisting reality—wanting lines to move faster, wanting people to text you back, wanting your boss to recognize your worth, wanting more friends, wanting people to like you, wanting your family to support your career change—if all those thoughts, feelings, and precious moments in your day were put toward something that truly mattered to you, where would you be? Who would you be? What would you have achieved?

THAT is the cost of not using Let Them.

Now think about all the missed opportunities—the people you wished you had introduced yourself to, the career you wanted to pursue, the music, the stand-up, the book you never wrote, the photo you never posted, the trip you didn’t book, the thing you were afraid to say, the person you were afraid to love.

THAT is the cost of not using Let Me.

Can you really afford that price? I know I can’t.

We all love to think of excuses for why people who have what we want are somehow different from us: They were born into money. They are more attractive. Their life has been easier. They’ve gotten lucky.

I’m sorry to break it to you, but that is a cop-out. There is no difference between you and the people you see achieving extraordinary things. They aren’t special.

But there’s one thing for sure they’ve figured out: They don’t let the world around them derail their dreams. They’ve learned to navigate the sky, to accept the weather as it comes, and to keep moving toward their goals no matter what. At some point, they got sick and tired of worrying about what everybody else thought and just forced themselves to get to work.

They are laser focused on waking up every day and proving, over and over through their actions, that they are worthy and deserving of the vision they have for their life.

Every day that you allow your fear of somebody else’s opinion, stress over friendships, or concern about how someone will react to prevent you from making the phone call, filling out the application, working on the business plan, starting the diet, or putting in the effort, you’re holding yourself back. You’re robbing yourself of your potential. You’re standing still while life moves on around you.

Stop wasting your brain space on the million tiny things that don’t matter. It’s time to use every second of your day for all the amazing things you know you’re capable of.

Stop letting the fear of what people might think paralyze you. It’s time to go after your dreams boldly, relentlessly, and unapologetically.

Stop tiptoeing around everyone else’s emotions. It’s time to fiercely protect your own peace.

Stop letting other people’s success devastate you. It’s time to get to work.

Stop making your social life everyone else’s responsibility. It’s time to build the most incredible friendships you’ve ever had.

Stop trying to change people who don’t want to change. It’s time to let adults be adults.

Stop trying to rescue those who are struggling. It’s time to let others heal how they need to heal.

Stop wasting your time trying to get people to love you. It’s time to choose the love you deserve.

It’s finally time to reclaim your power and reclaim your life.

The Let Them Theory is your key to taking back your power.

You can have the life you’ve always wanted. You can be a millionaire.

You can have the beautiful love story you’ve always dreamed of. You can build a career that challenges and fulfills you.

The question is, will YOU let yourself do it?

Because no one else can stop you. It’s all on you.

The most important part of the Let Them Theory is understanding that you are responsible for your own happiness. You are responsible for the energy you bring and how you show up. You are responsible for waking up every day and doing the work to make progress on what matters. You are responsible for defining what matters to you. You are responsible for telling the truth even when it’s really hard. You are responsible for paying for your life. Nobody owes you anything, but you owe yourself everything.

If you’re not where you want to be, the great news is, it’s all your fault. The even better news is, the second you decide to, you can change it.

You’ve wasted so many years being so consumed with other people, their feelings, their thoughts, and what they’re doing. So let this book be your wake-up call: You are in charge.

This realization is not a condemnation, it’s a liberation.

Isn’t it incredible to know that others can’t affect you? Isn’t it liberating to know that they can say and do what they want—they can make fun, doubt, be the most successful person on this planet, and you remain unbothered?

How amazing is it that YOU get to be in control of what you think, what you say, and what you do?

How unbelievable is it that YOU get to choose where you pour your time and energy, and what you say yes to and what you say no to?

Taking back your power means reclaiming responsibility for your life. It means demanding more of yourself because time is ticking, and you’ve wasted enough of it worrying about things that don’t matter. It means being laser focused on the things you can control, and not giving a single second to the things you can’t.

Think of the sky once more. No matter what it brings, no matter how it changes, you are the one who gets to decide how to navigate beneath it. You are the one who gets to choose how to respond, how to act, how to live. The clouds, the storms, the sunshine—they all have their place, but they do not define you. You define yourself.

I won’t lie to you: It won’t be easy. It’s not like the second you start saying Let Them, you get everything you’ve ever wanted. Anyone who promises you that is lying to you.

But the second you take your power back, you can take comfort in the knowledge that it’s just a matter of time. The career, the partner, the friends, the body, the goals—they are now all in your control.

Now that we’re here, I am so incredibly excited to personally welcome you to your Let Me era.

Let Me get started.

Let Me take a risk.

Let Me write the book.

Let Me be honest about what I want.

Let Me get in the best shape of my life.

Let Me apply for the dream job.

Let Me stop giving love to people who don’t want me back.

Let Me create a better life. A life that makes me proud. A life that makes me happy. A life where I use my precious energy to enjoy every single moment I will have.

This book has shown you that you’ve always had control. You’ve always been in charge. You’ve always had the power. Now, it’s time to take it back.

I want you to know that whatever that big dream you see for yourself is, however crazy, unlikely, or silly it may seem, I see it for you. If you don’t believe in you, Let Me believe in you. If you don’t know you can do it, Let Me know it for you.

And if you don’t know where to start, Let Me help you take the first step. In case nobody else tells you, I want to be sure to tell you: I love you, I believe in you, and I believe in your ability to unlock all the magic and joy that your amazing life has to offer.

All it takes is two simple words:

Let Me.





APPENDIX



How to Apply Let Them to Parenting

One of the most common questions I get is how to use the Let Them Theory in parenting. Let’s be honest—if you let your kids do whatever they want, they’d probably be eating ice cream at every meal, skipping homework, and avoiding chores. But as a mom of three, I’ve discovered that when you let your kids be themselves, your relationship improves and deepens in ways you never thought possible.

While this book primarily focuses on adults, the Let Them Theory is also a powerful tool for parenting kids of all ages. It’s about connecting, supporting, and guiding—not controlling. Ultimately your job as a parent is to guide your children to become who they are meant to be, in other words—Let Them.

To help you strengthen your bond with your kids (and hopefully keep your sanity intact), I’ve put together a special bonus guide filled with practical tips on using the Let Them Theory in parenting. Because who doesn’t want an incredible relationship with their kids?

Download it at melrobbins.com/parenting to get started.





How to Apply Let Them to Teams



Over the years, I’ve had the opportunity to work with some of the world’s biggest companies, including Starbucks, JPMorganChase, Headspace, Audible, Ulta Beauty, and more.

One of the most common questions I’ve been asked is: How do I motivate my team?

The research is clear—having a good boss is what creates good teams. So what makes for a good boss? That’s where the Let Them Theory comes in. You may be thinking, You can’t just let your team do whatever they want—they need to be managed. True, but when you micromanage, you risk stifling creativity, damaging relationships, and creating a toxic work environment.

In other words, a controlling boss is a bad boss.

The Let Them Theory can help you find the right balance, empowering your team while providing the structure they need to thrive. After all, bad bosses kill good teams, and good bosses make great teams. In this special bonus guide, you’ll learn how to use the Let Them Theory to be as good a boss as you can be.

Download it at melrobbins.com/work to get started.





Let Me Acknowledge You



To the millions of fans of The Mel Robbins Podcast and everyone of you on social media, who either follows me or has shared content from the “lady with the glasses”—thank you! Without you I wouldn’t get to do what I love most. You are the reason this book exists. Your support, passion, love, and (of course) your tattoos inspired me to do something I swore I would never do again: write another book. Thank you for being a part of this incredible journey. Thank you for helping me create what I believe is the single most important piece of work I have ever done. One thing is certain, I wrote this book for you and it is yours as much as it is mine. I cannot wait to see how this book helps you improve your life and your relationships. You deserve more love, meaning, joy, and peace in your life, and the Let Them Theory will help you achieve it.

All the experts who have appeared on The Mel Robbins Podcast and in the pages of this book—thank you for hopping on planes and flying to Boston to sit down and spend time with me. I have learned so much from each and every one of you. Whether your research is cited directly in this book and bibliography, or not, know this; meeting, speaking, and learning from you has shaped every word and helped me improve my life. On behalf of everyone who will read this book, and every single listener of The Mel Robbins Podcast in 194 countries, thank you. Thank you for your work; thank you for sharing your wisdom with us.

Sawyer—my brilliant daughter, co-conspirator, co-researcher, co-writer, and co-pilot—you swore you would NEVER work for your mother, and here we are. I wake up every day grateful that you said yes when I asked “if you could help me with a ‘small research project’. . . it’s called the Let Them Theory.” You dove in and never came back up for air. It has been one of the most fulfilling experiences of my life to not only be your mom but to now get to know you as a colleague. I love you deeply and I love every moment of working with you, even though I know you are having to say Let Them, Let Them, Let Them (about me) the entire time.

Tracey—my right-hand, right-brain, sentence-finisher, and executive producer extraordinaire—Where would I be without you? Lost at sea. You keep this ship afloat. Your single best quality: I have never once seen you with a frown on your face or a negative attitude; thank you for always bringing the sun. After eight years I am so grateful for your calm, steady hand guiding the way through this wild adventure.

Susie—thank you for bringing fun and storytelling into the writing process. You’ve made me a better writer. You’ve added so much depth and soul to this project, and your work is an undeniable part of the book’s heart. You are an OG, and this book wouldn’t be where it is without you. I am so happy it brought us together and thrilled to know that this partnership is just beginning.

Juna—you came in like a whirlwind, impressing me daily with your incredible writing skills. Your ability to nail down the language, the power, and the vibe of this book was remarkable. You were essential in shaping this story into something powerful. I absolutely love the way you think!

Lynne—you know that feeling when someone shows up in your life and you realize what has been missing. . . that is you Lynne. You filled a need in my life, and it is only in working with you that I now realize what true support and excellence feels and looks like. You set the bar impossibly high. I don’t think I could do this job without you. Now, please put down your phone and turn off your laptop. . . stop working. . . and enjoy your weekend! I am not going anywhere, neither are you, so get some rest while you can. <3

Cindy—to our ROCKSTAR in pink Crocs and matching lipstick with the best Boston accent you have ever heard, I love you from the bottom of my heart. From the moment you walked into our lives, you brought so much joy and laughter. I never thought at the age of 56 I would find a “house mom” in real life—you know the amazing human who takes care of an entire sorority—that is you! You might as well be named Cindy Robbins and at this point Yolo and Homie get more excited when you walk in than when I do.

Amy & Jessie—to the OGs up here in Vermont. We first bonded over how much we HATED living in VT and had no idea what the heck we’d do in this tiny rural town. Moving here wasn’t a coincidence; it was synchronicity. Over the past four years we have laughed, cried, and pushed our way through every obstacle—one cold plunge and card pull at a time (Amazing Amy!). And along the way, we managed to launch the single “fastest growing podcast” on the planet, from above our garage in the middle of nowhere. There’s something magical about meeting some of your most favorite people later in life. And you are two of mine. I have a feeling this next chapter is going to be the most divine and epic one yet. The most surprising part is we absolutely love living here now.

Melody—our editor, copyediting champion, and fellow cool-eyeglass fashionista—thank you for gracefully managing my many, many late-night, last-minute delays. You always showed up with a smile and made sure this book was polished and perfect. I owe you a mountain of coffee and endless gratitude.

Marc—you already know how much I adore you. Not only did you make this book possible but you also ensured that its message would reach readers around the globe, with translations in languages far beyond the borders of the U.S. You are the best, a genius at making deals and helping me be the first author to do the “things” we do, the unique way we do them (top secret everyone)—I’m forever grateful. ;)

Christine—my sister-in-law, business partner, fellow Australian shepherd lover, and best friend—thank you for being my rock. I’m sorry I have had so many meltdowns over the writing of this book. I am embarrassed by all the emotional texts and late-night venting I did at you. No one on the planet needs the part of this book about managing emotions more than I do. Thank you for having so much grace. Thank you for guiding our company from an out-of-control start-up to a world-class business and global powerhouse in personal development. I am so proud of you. I am proud to be your partner. And I am so proud of what we’ve built together. I couldn’t have done it without knowing you always have my back and our best interest at heart. I wake up every day and say to myself: Can you believe we get to do this for a living? I can always hear you say in the back of my mind: We are magical b*tches.

Chris—thank you for always going camping during the Let Them marathon writing weeks. A book can’t be bound without a spine and you are that for me. You hold our family together. The thing I love most about my life is that I get to spend it with you.

Kendall and Oakley—based on what you have heard about how grueling this book process has been I can imagine you were grateful that you were at college and in LA as Sawyer and I duked it out. You have always supported me in pursuing my dreams, and know this: Whatever it is that you choose to do with your lives, I’ll be there every step of the way to cheer you on.

Mom and Dad—Mom: I think you get credit for instilling me with the Let Me spirit as a little girl. As I wrote this book, I kept thinking about that needlepoint pillow you stitched with the saying: Pull Up Your Big Girl Panties And Deal With It. LOL. Thank you for being my biggest supporters and for always being there when I needed you. I know you are proud of me, and I want you to know—I am proud of you, your marriage, and the life you’ve created too.

Anne—thank you for teaching me how to become a whole woman. Words cannot describe the impact you have made in my life, my marriage, and my ability to unlock my full potential. I love you.

David—whenever I need advice, perspective, coaching, a laugh, or a great gin and tonic—I got you on speed dial. Thank you for teaching me how to be a Good Boss and an even better friend. Christine and I couldn’t do it without you, and we definitely wouldn’t want to! Love you.

Pete—you absolutely nailed it with the book cover. The design is everything I dreamed of and more. I am sure I have been a giant pain in the rear end to work with, and I appreciate your patience with all the last-minute chaos. Thank you for your creativity—the cover is absolutely amazing, and I hope you are as proud of it as I am.

Julie—What can I say? The interior of this book feels clean, light, and exactly right. You made it all come together, and I’m thrilled with the result. Thank you for your hard work and dedication!

Lindsay—it is hard to put in words how much I appreciate your support even when I wasn’t publishing a new book. You have been booking me on the Today show and sending me PR opportunities. You are smart, dedicated, and I am so excited to continue this rodeo with you.

To my entire team—thank you for giving me and Sawyer the space to write this book, all while you were producing two podcast episodes a week, a six-month online coaching program, keynote speeches, and productions for our partners at Audible, Ulta Beauty. . . and many more! You are THE BEST team on the planet. I couldn’t have done it without your dedication and teamwork.

The tattoo artists and those who gave me your stories through your art—you are the true inspiration behind this book. Watching the Let Them concept take off has been humbling and exhilarating. It all began with you, and I’m forever grateful for the chance to share your meaningful, beautiful designs with the world.

Patty, Reid, Diane, Lizzi, Arya-Mehr, Marlene, Betsy, Kathleen, and the entire team at Hay House—I love being your partner. There is so much that you do that I don’t even know what I should be listing, so to absolutely everyone who has supported this book, sold it, marketed it, and read it, it takes a village and it’s an honor to be a part of yours.

Partners at Audible—WOW! We have been working together for seven YEARS. I cannot believe how much we have done together. Even as I write this acknowledgment, for partnering with me on The Let Them Theory audiobook, you and I are actively researching the topic for our seventh original Audible production together. I am so honored to be a part of your global and life-changing mission. Here’s to the next seven Audible originals. I love you guys!

Align PR—You are the first PR agency I have ever hired and it is so worth it. I am amazed by the way you think, operate, and excel at your craft. I am proud to work with the best and that is YOU.





Bibliography



I’ve poured everything into this book—my heart, my soul, and years of learning from the best experts in the world. The Let Them Theory is built on research that’s always evolving, just like you and me. What I’m sharing here is a powerful beginning, but there’s always more to discover. Human behavior and relationships are endlessly fascinating, and as new insights emerge, our understanding will only deepen. The reason I’ve listed all the sources in alphabetical order is simple: I want you to focus on the bigger picture, not get lost in a sea of citations.

This theory isn’t about isolating one study—it’s about blending the most powerful ideas from psychology, neuroscience, and human behavior to create something transformative for you. As I said in the Introduction, this book is not a textbook or an academic paper, but rather a guide. The sources in the following pages are just a glimpse into the incredible work that has shaped the Let Them Theory. Your journey doesn’t end here—it’s just getting started.



* * *



Abbott, Alison. “New Theory of Dopamine’s Role in Learning Could Help Explain Addiction.” Nature, August 9, 2018. www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05902-7.

Alter, Adam. Anatomy of a Breakthrough: How to Get Unstuck When It Matters Most. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2023.

Amabile, Teresa, and Steven Kramer. The Progress Principle: Using Small Wins to Ignite Joy, Engagement, and Creativity at Work. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011.

Amati, Valeria, et al. “Social Relations and Life Satisfaction: The Role of Friends.” Genus 74, no. 1 (2018): 1–18.

Aron, Arthur, and Elaine N. Aron. “The Importance of Love and Commitment in Close Relationships.” Psychology of Relationships 45 (2012): 150–172.

Aurelius, Marcus. Meditations. Translated by Gregory Hays. New York: Penguin Classics, 2006.

Bandura, Albert. “On the Functional Properties of Perceived Self-Efficacy Revisited.” Journal of Management 38, no. 1 (2012): 9–44.

Barron, Helen C., et al. “Unmasking Latent Inhibitory Connections in Human Cortex to Reveal Dormant Cortical Memories.” Neuron 107, no. 2 (2020): 338–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.05.001.

Baumeister, Roy F., and Mark R. Leary. “The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation.” Psychological Bulletin 117, no. 3 (1995): 497–529.

Ben-Shahar, Tal. Happier: Learn the Secrets to Daily Joy and Lasting Fulfillment. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.

Bilyeu, Lisa. Radical Confidence: 11 Lessons on How to Get the Relationship, Career, and Life You Want. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2024.

Bolte, Annette, Thomas Goschke, and Julius Kuhl. “Emotion and Intuition.” Psychological Science 14, no. 5 (2003): 416–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.01456.

Bolte Taylor, Jill. My Stroke of Insight: A Brain Scientist’s Personal Journey. New York: Viking, 2008.

Bolte Taylor, Jill. Whole Brain Living: The Anatomy of Choice and the Four Characters That Drive Our Life. New York: Hay House, 2021.

Brach, Tara. Radical Acceptance: Embracing Your Life with the Heart of a Buddha. New York: Bantam, 2004.

Brehm, Jack W., and Elizabeth A. Self. “The Intensity of Motivation.” Annual Review of Psychology 40, no. 1 (2009): 109–131.

Brown, Brené. Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable Transforms the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead. New York: Gotham, 2012.

Brown, Brené. I Thought It Was Just Me (but It Isn’t): Telling the Truth About Perfectionism, Inadequacy, and Power. New York: Gotham Books, 2008.

Bryant, Erin. “Dopamine Affects How Brain Decides Whether Goal Is Worth Effort.” NIH Research Matters, April 17, 2017. www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/dopamine-affects-how-brain-decides-whether-goal-worth-effort.

Buunk, Bram P., and Frederick X. Gibbons. “Social Comparison: The End of a Theory and the Emergence of a Field.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 102, no. 1 (2007): 3–21.

Buunk, Bram P., and Frederick X. Gibbons. “Social Comparison: The End of a Theory and the Emergence of a Field.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 9, no. 3 (2014): 234–252.

Christakis, Nicholas A., and James H. Fowler. Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and How They Shape Our Lives. New York, NY: Little, Brown, 2011.

Clark, C., and J. Greenberg. “Fear of Rejection and Sensitivity to Social Feedback: Implications for Mental Health.” Clinical Psychology Review 84 (2021): 101945.

Clark, Margaret S., and Edward P. Lemay. “Close Relationships and Well-Being: The Role of Compassionate Goals.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 4, no. 5 (2010): 289–301.

Collins, R. L. “For Better or Worse: The Impact of Upward Social Comparison on Self-Evaluations.” Psychological Bulletin 119, no. 1 (1996): 51–69.

Conti, Paul. Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal from It. New York: Sounds True, 2021.

Corcoran, Katja, and Thomas Mussweiler. “Social Comparison and Rumination: Insights into the Motivational Impact of Others’ Success.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 103, no. 4 (2012): 712–727.

Crum, Alia J., and Derek J. Phillips. “Self-Fulfilling Prophecies, Placebo Effects, and the Social-Psychological Creation of Reality.” In Handbook of Social Psychology, 2nd ed. Springer, 2015.

Crum, Alia J., and Ellen J. Langer. “Mindset Matters: Exercise and the Placebo Effect.” Psychological Science 18, no. 2 (2010): 165–171.

Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper & Row, 1990.

Damasio, Antonio R. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Penguin Books, 1994.

Damour, Lisa. The Emotional Lives of Teenagers: Raising Connected, Capable, and Compassionate Adolescents. London: Atlantic Books, 2023.

Damour, Lisa. Under Pressure: Confronting the Epidemic of Stress and Anxiety in Girls. London: Atlantic Books, 2019.

Damour, Lisa. Untangled: Guiding Teenage Girls Through the Seven Transitions into Adulthood. London: Atlantic Books Ltd, 2016.

Davidson, Richard J., and Sharon Begley. The Emotional Life of Your Brain. New York: Plume, 2012.

Day, Kristen, Corinne Carreon, and Caitlin Stump. “The Influence of the Physical Environment on Health Behavior: Implications for Cancer Survivorship.” Public Health Reports 126 (2011): 112–121.

Demir, Melikşah, et al. “Friendships, Psychological Well-Being, and Happiness: A Study on the Role of Socialization Goals in Emerging Adulthood.” Journal of Happiness Studies 16, no. 6 (2015): 1559–1574.

Dijksterhuis, Ap, et al. “The Mechanisms of Social Comparison in Success and Failure Contexts.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 46, no. 6 (2010): 923–929.

Duhigg, Charles. The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business. New York, NY: Random House, 2014.

Dunbar, Robin I. M. How Many Friends Does One Person Need? Dunbar’s Number and Other Evolutionary Quirks. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2010.

Dunning, David. “The Dunning-Kruger Effect: On Being Ignorant of One’s Own Ignorance.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 44, edited by Mark P. Zanna, 247–296. Elsevier, 2011.

Durvasula, Ramani. It’s Not You. New York: Post Hill Press, 2024.

Durvasula, Ramani. Should I Stay or Should I Go?: Surviving a Relationship with a Narcissist. New York: Post Hill Press, 2015.

Dweck, Carol S. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York: Random House, 2006.

Eagleman, David. Livewired: The Inside Story of the Ever-Changing Brain. New York: Pantheon Books, 2020.

Ekman, Paul. “What Scientists Who Study Emotion Agree About.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 11, no. 1 (2016): 31–34.

Epstein, Mark. Thoughts Without a Thinker: Psychotherapy from a Buddhist Perspective. New York: Basic Books, 1995.

Evans, Gary W. “The Built Environment and Mental Health.” Annual Review of Public Health 29, no. 1 (2011): 403–416.

“Exercising to Relax.” Harvard Health Publishing, February 2011. www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/exercising-to-relax.

Ferriss, Timothy. Tools of Titans: The Tactics, Routines, and Habits of Billionaires, Icons, and World-Class Performers. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017.

Festinger, Leon. “A Theory of Social Comparison Processes: Retrospective and Contemporary Perspectives.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 123, no. 2 (2012): 100–121.

Finkel, Eli J., and Roy F. Baumeister. “Attachment and Marriage: New Developments in the Science of Close Relationships.” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 42 (2010): 1–50.

Fiori, Katherine L., et al. “Friendship Quality in Late Adulthood: The Role of Positive and Negative Social Exchanges in Well-Being.” Journal of Aging and Health 32, no. 3–4 (2020): 163–176.

Fishbach, Ayelet, and Stacey R. Finkelstein. “How Positive and Negative Feedback Motivate Goal Pursuit.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 6, no. 5 (2012): 359–366.

Fogg, B.J. Tiny Habits: The Small Changes That Change Everything. Boston: Mariner Books, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2020.

Ford, Michael E., and Clyde W. Nichols. “A Framework for Explaining Social Cognitive Influences on Behavior.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 52, edited by Mark P. Zanna, 193–246. Elsevier, 2015.

Frankl, Viktor E. Man’s Search for Meaning. New York: Washington Square Press, 1985.

Gallagher, Winifred. Rapt: Attention and the Focused Life. New York: Penguin Books, 2009.

Gallo, Amy, Shawn Achor, Michelle Gielan, and Monique Valcour. “How Your Morning Mood Affects Your Whole Workday.” Harvard Business Review. Harvard Business School Publishing, October 5, 2016. https://hbr.org/2016/07/how-your-morning-mood-affects-your-whole-workday.

Garrett, Neil, and Tali Sharot. “Updating Beliefs Under Perceived Threat.” Affective Brain Lab, August 2018. https://affectivebrain.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Updating-Beliefs-Under-Perceived-Threat.pdf.

Garrett, Neil, et al. “Updating Beliefs Under Perceived Threat.” Nature Neuroscience 22, no. 12 (2019): 2066–2074. https://affectivebrain.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/s41593-019-0549-2.pdf.

Grant, Heidi, and Carol S. Dweck. “Clarifying Achievement Goals and Their Impact.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85, no. 3 (2009): 541–553.

Greitemeyer, Tobias. “Effects of Exposure to Others’ Opinions on Social Influence: Mechanisms of Conformity, Compliance, and Obedience.” Psychological Bulletin 135, no. 6 (2009): 895–915.

Gilbert, Paul. The Compassionate Mind: A New Approach to Facing Challenges. London: Constable & Robinson, 2009.

Gilbert, Paul. The Compassionate Mind Workbook. London: Robinson, 2010.

Goldstein, Joseph. One Dharma: The Emerging Western Buddhism. New York: HarperCollins, 2003.

Gottman, John M. The Relationship Cure: A 5 Step Guide to Strengthening Your Marriage, Family, and Friendships. New York: Harmony Books, 2002.

Gottman, John, Julie Gottman, and Doug Abrams. Eight Dates: Essential Conversations for a Lifetime of Love. New York: Workman Publishing, 2019.

Gottman, John M., and Nan Silver. The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work: A Practical Guide from the Country’s Foremost Relationship Expert. New York: Harmony Books, 2015.

Greenfieldboyce, Nell. “The Human Brain Never Stops Growing Neurons, a New Study Claims.” PBS NewsHour, March 25, 2019. www.pbs.org/newshour/science/the-human-brain-never-stops-growing-neurons-a-new-study-claims.

Grenny, Joseph. “4 Things to Do Before a Tough Conversation.” Harvard Business Review, January 22, 2019. https://hbr.org/2019/01/4-things-to-do-before-a-tough-conversation.

Gross, James J., and Ross A. Thompson. “Emotion Regulation: Conceptual Foundations.” In Handbook of Emotion Regulation, 2nd ed., edited by James J. Gross, 3–24. New York: Guilford Press, 2014.

Guell, Xavier, A. David G. Leslie, and Jeremy D. Schmahmann. “Functional Topography of the Human Cerebellum: A Meta-Analysis of Neuroimaging Studies.” NeuroImage 124 (2016): 107–118. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5789790.

Hall, Jeffrey A. “How Many Hours Does It Take to Make a Friend?” Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 36, no. 4 (2019): 1278–1296.

Hamm, Jill V., and Beverly S. Faircloth. “The Role of Friendship in Adolescents’ Sense of School Belonging.” New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development 2015, no. 148 (2015): 61–78.

Hartup, Willard W., and Nancy Stevens. “Friendships and Adaptation Across the Life Span.” Current Directions in Psychological Science 8, no. 3 (2011): 76–79.

Hayes, Steven C., Kirk D. Strosahl, and Kelly G. Wilson. Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: An Experiential Approach to Behavior Change. New York: Guilford Press, 1999.

Heckhausen, Jutta. “Developmental Regulation in Adulthood: Age-Normative and Sociocultural Constraints as Adaptive Challenges.” Psychology and Aging 27, no. 4 (2012): 937–950.

Heckhausen, Jutta, and Heinz Heckhausen, eds. Motivation and Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.

Hill, Sarah E., and David M. Buss. “Envy and Status in Social Groups: An Evolutionary Perspective on Competition and Collaboration.” Evolutionary Psychology 8, no. 3 (2010): 345–368.

“How to Strengthen Relationships Between Parents and Adult Children.” American Psychological Association, May 18, 2023. www.apa.org/news/podcasts/speaking-of-psychology/parent-adult-children-relationships.

Hussey, Matthew. Love Life: How to Raise Your Standards, Find Your Person, and Live Happily (No Matter What). London: HarperCollins UK, 2024.

Hyun, Jinshil, Martin J. Sliwinski, and Joshua M. Smyth. “Waking Up on the Wrong Side of the Bed: The Effects of Stress Anticipation on Working Memory in Daily Life.” The Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gby042.

Insel, Thomas R. “The NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) Project: Precision Medicine for Psychiatry.” American Journal of Psychiatry 171, no. 4 (2014): 395–97. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5854216/.

Kabat-Zinn, Jon. Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and Illness. New York: Delacorte Press, 1990.

Johnson, M. D., and Franz J. Neyer. “(Eventual) Stability and Change Across Partnerships.” Journal of Family Psychology 33, no. 6 (2019): 711–721. https://doi.org/10.1037/fam0000523.

Johnson, Colleen L., and Lillian E. Troll. “Friends and Aging: The Interplay of Intimacy and Distance.” Generations 36, no. 1 (2012): 32–39.

Kabat-Zinn, Jon. Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in Everyday Life. New York: Hachette Books, 2013.

Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011.

Kanfer, Ruth, and Gilad Chen. “Motivation in Organizational Behavior: Insights and Directions.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 136 (2016): 121–133.

Kanojia, Alok. How to Raise a Healthy Gamer: Break Bad Screen Habits, End Power Struggles, and Transform Your Relationship with Your Kids. London: Pan Macmillan, 2024.

Kaplan, Rachel, and Stephen Kaplan. The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2011.

Koob, George F., and Nora D. Volkow. “Neurobiology of Addiction: A Neurocircuitry Analysis.” The Lancet Psychiatry 3, no. 8 (2016): 760–773.

Kross, Ethan, and Ozlem Ayduk. “Self-Distancing: Theory, Research, and Current Directions.” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 55 (2017): 81–136.

Kurth-Nelson, Zeb, et al. “Computational Approaches to Neuroscience: Modeling Belief Updating Under Threat.” PLoS Computational Biology 15, no. 2 (2019). https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007089#ack.

La Guardia, Jennifer G., and Richard M. Ryan. Self-Determination Theory: Basic Psychological Needs in Motivation, Development, and Wellness. New York: Guilford Press, 2013.

Lavy, Shiri, and Hadassah Littman-Ovadia. “The Effect of Love on Personal Growth and Self-Perception in Relationships.” Journal of Positive Psychology 6, no. 3 (2011): 209–216.

Leary, Mark R., and Roy F. Baumeister. “The Nature and Function of Self-Esteem: Sociometer Theory.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 32, edited by Mark P. Zanna, 1–62. Elsevier, 2012.

Leary, Mark R., and Roy F. Baumeister. “The Nature and Function of Self-Esteem: Sociometer Theory.” In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 32, edited by Mark P. Zanna, 1–62. New York: Academic Press, 1995.

LeDoux, Joseph. The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.

Levine, Peter A., and Gabor Maté. In an Unspoken Voice: How the Body Releases Trauma and Restores Goodness. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2010.

Levitt, Mary J., et al. “Close Relationships Across the Life Span.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science 2, no. 1 (2011): 1–12.

LeWine, Howard E., M. D. “Understanding the Stress Response.” Harvard Health. Harvard Medical School, July 6, 2020. www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/understanding-the-stress-response.

Luthar, Suniya S., and Natasha L. Kumar. “Friendship Quality, Social Skills, and Resilience in Adolescence.” Child Development 89, no. 3 (2018): 876–890.

Lyons, Scott. Addicted to Drama: Healing Dependency on Crisis and Chaos in Yourself and Others. New York: Hachette Go, 2023.

Lyubomirsky, Sonja, et al. “Why Are Some People Happier Than Others? The Role of Cognitive and Motivational Processes in Well-Being.” American Psychologist 56, no. 3 (2011): 239–249.

Maddux, James E. Self-Efficacy, Adaptation, and Adjustment: Theory, Research, and Application. Springer, 2013.

Margaret Mead, quoted in The World Ahead: An Anthropologist Anticipates the Future, edited by Ruth Nanda Anshen, 24. New York: Berghahn Books, 2000.

Marsh, Herbert W., and John W. Parker. “Determinants of Student Self-Concept: Is It Better to Be a Relatively Large Fish in a Small Pond Even If You Don’t Learn to Swim as Well?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 47, no. 1 (1984): 213–231.

Marques, Luana. Bold Move: A 3-Step Plan to Transform Anxiety into Power. London: Hachette UK, 2023.

McGonigal, Kelly. The Willpower Instinct. New York: Avery, 2012.

McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and Matthew E. Brashears. “Social Isolation in America: Changes in Core Discussion Networks Over Two Decades.” American Sociological Review 74, no. 3 (2009): 353–375.

Miller, William R., and Stephen Rollnick. Motivational Interviewing: Helping People Change. 3rd ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2012.

Mikulincer, Mario, and Phillip R. Shaver. Attachment in Adulthood: Structure, Dynamics, and Change. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2016.

Mineo, Liz. “Over Nearly 80 Years, Harvard Study Has Been Showing How to Live a Healthy and Happy Life.” Harvard Gazette, April 11, 2017. https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2017/04/over-nearly-80-years-harvard-study-has-been-showing-how-to-live-a-healthy-and-happy-life.

Mora, Florentina, Sergio Segovia, and José R. Del Arco. “Aging, Stress, and the Hippocampus.” Aging Research Reviews 11, no. 2 (April 2012): 123–129. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23403892.

Morin, Alexandre J. S., and Christophe Maïano. “The Social Comparison Process and Its Implications for Goal Pursuit and Achievement Motivation.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 5, no. 6 (2011): 359–374.

Murray, Sandra L., and John G. Holmes. Interdependent Minds: The Dynamics of Close Relationships. New York: Guilford Press, 2013.

Murray, Sandra L., and Jennifer L. Derrick. “The Power of Reassurance: How Emotional Security Impacts Commitment in Relationships.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100, no. 4 (2011): 575–592.

Mussweiler, Thomas. “Comparison Processes in Social Judgment: Mechanisms and Consequences.” Psychological Review 109, no. 3 (2012): 472–489.

Neff, Kristin D. Self-Compassion: The Proven Power of Being Kind to Yourself. New York: HarperCollins, 2011.

Nerurkar, Aditi. The 5 Resets: Rewire Your Brain and Body for Less Stress and More Resilience. London: HarperCollins UK, 2024.

Norbury, Agnes, and Raymond J. Dolan. “Anticipatory Neural Activity Predicts Attenuated Learning in Perceived Threat.” Nature Neuroscience 22, no. 3 (2019): 437–448. https://affectivebrain.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/41562_2019_793_OnlinePDF_2.pdf.

Oettingen, Gabriele, Doris Mayer, A. Timur Sevincer, Elizabeth J. Stephens, Hyeon-ju Pak, and Meike Hagenah. “Mental Contrasting and Goal Commitment: The Mediating Role of Energization.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 35, no. 5 (2009): 608–22. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167208330856.

Oettingen, Gabriele, Hyeon-ju Pak, and Karoline Schnetter. “Self-Regulation of Goal-Setting: Turning Free Fantasies about the Future into Binding Goals.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 80, no. 5 (2001): 736–53. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.5.736.

Oliver, Mary. “The Summer Day.” In New and Selected Poems, 94. Boston: Beacon Press, 1992.

Oswald, Debra L., and Elizabeth M. Clark. “Best Friends Forever? High School Best Friendships and Adult Friendship Development.” Journal of Adolescence 84 (2020): 153–165.

Pilat, Dan, and Krastev, Sekoul M.D., “Why Do We Take Mental Shortcuts?” The Decision Lab. The Decision Lab, January 27, 2021. https://thedecisionlab.com/biases/heuristics.

Platt, Michael L., et al. “Beyond Utility: Social and Biological Roots of Decision-Making in the Brain.” Nature Neuroscience 19, no. 10 (2016): 1303–1310.

Porges, Stephen W. The Polyvagal Theory: Neurophysiological Foundations of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, and Self-Regulation. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2011.

Reeve, Johnmarshall. Understanding Motivation and Emotion. 7th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2018.

Reis, Harry T., and Susan L. Gable. “Social Support and the Regulation of Personal Relationships.” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 52 (2015): 201–245.

Roberts, Sarah Jakes. Power Moves: Ignite Your Confidence and Become a Force. Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2024.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Aditi Nerurkar. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, May 23, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/1-stress-doctor-5-tools-to-protect-your-brain-from/id1646101002?i=1000656467802.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Alok Kanojia. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, June 5, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbins-podcast/id1646101002?i=1000657879202.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Alok Kanojia. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, September 2, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbins-podcast/id1646101002?i=1000668009088.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Lisa Bilyeu. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, March 28, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbins-podcast/id1646101002?i=1000650685813.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Lisa Damour. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, May 18, 2023. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbins-podcast/id1646101002?i=1000613472370.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Luana Marques. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, July 20, 2023. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbins-podcast/id1646101002?i=1000621712441.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Matthew Hussey. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, May 27, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbinspodcast/id1646101002?i=1000656851968.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Robert Waldinger. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, April 4, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbinspodcast/id1646101002?i=1000651381441.

Robbins, Mel. Interview with Sarah Jakes Roberts. The Mel Robbins Podcast, podcast audio, July 25, 2024. https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-mel-robbins-podcast/id1646101002?i=1000663279637.

Robbins, Mel. The 5 Second Rule: Transform Your Life, Work, and Confidence with Everyday Courage. Brentwood, TN: Savio Republic, 2017.

Robbins, Mel. The High 5 Habit. Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, 2021.

Rusbult, Caryl E., and Paul A. M. Van Lange. “Why Do Relationships Persist? The Role of Investment in Long-Term Commitment.” Psychological Science 22, no. 7 (2010): 135–140.

Ryan, Richard M., and Edward L. Deci. “Promoting Self-Determined Relationships and Well-Being.” Educational Psychologist 44, no. 2 (2009): 73–85.

Sangwan, Neha. Powered by Me: From Burned Out to Fully Charged at Work and in Life. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2023.

Sapolsky, Robert M. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers. New York: Henry Holt and Co., 2004.

Schore, Allan N. Affect Regulation and the Repair of the Self. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2003.

Schwartz, Barry. The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less. New York: Harper Perennial, 2004.

Seligman, Martin. Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize Your Potential for Lasting Fulfillment. New York: Atria Paperback, 2013.

Siegel, Daniel J. The Developing Mind: How Relationships and the Brain Interact to Shape Who We Are. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2012.

Seligman, Martin E. P. Flourish: A Visionary New Understanding of Happiness and Well-Being. New York: Free Press, 2011.

“Self-Acceptance Could Be the Key to a Happier Life, Yet It’s the Happy Habit Many People Practice the Least.” ScienceDaily. University of Hertfordshire, March 7, 2014. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/03/140307111016.htm.

Seneca. Letters from a Stoic. Translated by Robin Campbell. New York: Penguin Classics, 2004.

Shapiro, Ron. “How to Have Difficult Conversations Without Burning Bridges.” Harvard Business Review, May 15, 2023. https://hbr.org/2023/05/how-to-have-difficult-conversations-without-burning-bridges.

Sharot, Tali. The Influential Mind: What the Brain Reveals About Our Power to Change Others. London: Hachette UK, 2017.

Sharot, Tali. The Optimism Bias: A Tour of the Irrationally Positive Brain. New York: Vintage, 2011.

Sharot, Tali, and Cass R. Sunstein. Look Again: The Power of Noticing What Was Always There. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2024.

Smith, James M., and Nicholas A. Christakis. “Social Networks and Health.” Annual Review of Sociology 36 (2010): 435–457.

Sprecher, Susan, and Pamela C. Regan. “The Importance of Friendship in Romantic Relationships.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 8, no. 8 (2014): 412–425.

Sprecher, Susan, and Pamela C. Regan. “The Importance of Reciprocity and Self-Respect in Romantic Relationships.” Personal Relationships 8, no. 4 (2014): 419–435.

Swart, Tara B. “Impact of Cortisol on Social Stress and Health.” Journal of Neuroscience Research 129, no. 2 (2023): 304–15.

Swart Bieber, Tara. The Source: The Secrets of the Universe, the Science of the Brain. London: Vermilion, 2019.

Tannen, Deborah. You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation. New York: HarperCollins, 2011.

Tesser, Abraham, and Richard H. Smith. “The Meaning of Success: The Social Psychology of Competition and Achievement.” Annual Review of Psychology 65 (2014): 519–546.

Tolle, Eckhart. The Power of Now: A Guide to Spiritual Enlightenment. Vancouver: New World Library, 2004.

Tsabary, Shefali. The Conscious Parent: Transforming Ourselves, Empowering Our Children. Vancouver: Namaste Publishing, 2010.

Ulrich, Roger S. “Evidence-Based Health-Care Architecture.” The Lancet 370, no. 9597 (2011): 139–140.

Updegraff, John A., and Shelley E. Taylor. “From Vulnerability to Growth: The Influence of Successful Others on Personal Growth in the Face of Challenge.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 102, no. 5 (2013): 936–948.

Vaillant, George E. “Involuntary Coping Mechanisms: A Psychodynamic Perspective.” Harvard Review of Psychiatry 19, no. 3 (2011): 148–152.

Van Bavel, Jay J., and Dominic J. Packer. “The Power of Us: Intergroup Situations and Group-Based Persuasion.” Social and Personality Psychology Compass 10, no. 8 (2016): 409–420.

van der Kolk, Bessel. The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of Trauma. New York: Viking, 2014.

van der Kolk, Bessel, Alexander C. McFarlane, and Lars Weisæth, eds. Traumatic Stress: The Effects of Overwhelming Experience on Mind, Body, and Society. New York: Guilford Press, 2007.

Van Dijk, Wilco W., and Marcel Zeelenberg. “The Paradox of Envy: Comparing Ourselves with Better-Off Others May Cause Personal Growth.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86, no. 2 (2014): 192–203.

Vogel, E. A., J. P. Rose, L. R. Roberts, and K. Eckles. “Social Comparison, Social Media, and Self-Esteem.” Psychology of Popular Media Culture 3, no. 4 (2014): 206–222. https://doi.org/10.1037/ppm0000047.

Vohs, Kathleen D., et al. “Decision Fatigue Exhausts Self-Regulatory Resources—But So Does Accommodating to Unrealistic Social Expectations.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 104, no. 6 (2014): 940–950.

Vohs, Kathleen D., and Roy F. Baumeister, eds. Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications. 2nd ed. New York: Guilford Publications, 2016.

Waldinger, Robert, and Marc Schulz. The Good Life: Lessons from the World’s Longest Study on Happiness. New York: Random House, 2023.

White, Katherine, and Darrin R. Lehman. “Culture and Social Comparison Seeking: The Role of Self-Motives.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31, no. 2 (2005): 232–242. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167204271326.

Willis, Judy. “The Neuroscience behind Stress and Learning.” Nature Partner Journal Science of Learning. Nature Publishing Group, October 16, 2016. https://npjscilearncommunity.nature.com/posts/12735-the-neuroscience-behind-stress-and-learning.

Willis, Judy. “What You Should Know About Your Brain.” Educational Leadership 67, no. 4 (January 2010).

Wiseman, Richard. The Luck Factor. New York: Miramax Books, 2003.

Wood, Alex M., et al. “The Role of Gratitude in the Development of Social Support, Stress, and Depression: Two Longitudinal Studies.” Journal of Research in Personality 45, no. 4 (2011): 466–474.

Wood, Joanne V., and Abraham Tesser. “Ruminating on Unchangeable Success: Downward Social Comparison and Self-Improvement Strategies.” European Journal of Social Psychology 41, no. 4 (2011): 387–396.

Wrzus, Cornelia, et al. “Social Network Changes and Life Events Across the Life Span: A Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 139, no. 1 (2013): 53–80.

Zaki, Jamil. “Empathy: A Motivated Account.” Psychological Bulletin 140, no. 6 (2014): 1608–1647.

Zaki, Jamil. The War for Kindness: Building Empathy in a Fractured World. New York: Crown Publishing, 2019.





About Mel



Mel Robbins is a New York Times bestselling author and a world-renowned expert on mindset, motivation, and behavior change, whose work has been translated into 41 languages.

With millions of books sold, seven #1 Audible titles, and billions of video views, Mel’s impact is truly global. As the host of The Mel Robbins Podcast, the Webby and Signal Award–winning #1 education podcast in the world, Mel empowers listeners in 194 countries every day.

Her media company, 143 Studios Inc., produces provocative, award-winning content, transformative events, and original training programs for clients like Starbucks, JPMorganChase, LinkedIn, Headspace, and Ulta Beauty. She was named one of Forbes’ 50 Over 50 and serves on the board of directors of Amplify Publishing.

Known for her ability to simplify complex topics into practical daily actions, Mel Robbins delivers her most powerful and profound work yet with The Let Them Theory.

Learn more at melrobbins.com.





How to Stay in Touch with Me



If you loved this book—you’ll really love:

1. My Newsletter

One of the most popular newsletters in the world. Every week, the latest issue is sent to over 2,000,000 people. It’s personal, inspiring, and packed with the best ideas and helpful advice.

Sign up for free at melrobbins.com/newsletter.



2. The Mel Robbins Podcast

TIME magazine says “it gives listeners a reason to believe in themselves.” The Mel Robbins Podcast is one of the top ranked podcasts in the world. New episodes release weekly and can be found wherever you listen to podcasts or on youtube.com/melrobbins.



3. Connecting on Social

Connect with me daily on all your favorite social media platforms at @melrobbins.



Learn more at melrobbins.com





We hope you enjoyed this Hay House book. If you’d like to receive our online catalog featuring additional information on Hay House books and products, or if you’d like to find out more about the Hay Foundation, please contact:



Hay House LLC, P.O. Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100

(760) 431-7695 or (800) 654-5126

www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org

——

Published in Australia by:

Hay House Australia Publishing Pty Ltd

18/36 Ralph St., Alexandria NSW 2015

Phone: +61 (02) 9669 4299

www.hayhouse.com.au

Published in the United Kingdom by:

Hay House UK Ltd

1st Floor, Crawford Corner,

91–93 Baker Street, London W1U 6QQ

Phone: +44 (0)20 3927 7290

www.hayhouse.co.uk

Published in India by:

Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd

Muskaan Complex, Plot No. 3,

B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070

Phone: +91 11 41761620

www.hayhouse.co.in

——

Let Your Soul Grow

Experience life-changing transformation—one video at a time—with guidance from the world’s leading experts.

www.healyourlifeplus.com





Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster ebook.

Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.



CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP



Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.





For my husband, Mario, and my children: John, Clare, Kate, Meg, Sophie, and Lizzie





“Love is a constant process of tuning in, connecting, reading and misreading cues, disconnecting, repairing, and finding deeper connection. It’s a dance of meeting and parting and finding each other again. Minute to minute and day to day.”

Sue Johnson





Disclaimer: Secure Love was written to help struggling couples heal. However, the material in this book is not appropriate or safe for those in abusive relationships. A relationship is considered abusive and unsafe when one partner tries to exert power and control over the other partner with physical violence, emotional manipulation, extreme verbal abuse, sexual coercion, financial control, isolation, and/or intimidation. If you are in an abusive relationship, suspect you may be, or would like to know more about how to define abuse, it is highly recommended that you seek professional guidance. If you want help determining if you’re in an abusive relationship or to get guidance as to what to do next, help is immediately available all hours of the day at the National Domestic Violence Hotline: 1-800-799-7233.





Introduction




What does a healthy relationship look like?

Many of us have wondered this. But now I want you to forget this question forever. Instead, ask yourself: “What does a securely attached relationship feel like?”

If you don’t know what a securely attached relationship is, much less what it feels like, that’s okay. That’s why we’re here. By the end of this book, you will know about secure attachment, and more important, what it feels like to be in a relationship that is truly fulfilling. You will no longer have to wonder whether or not your relationship is working, because you will find the answers within yourself. If it’s not working, you will learn what needs to change and how to go about changing it. If you’re struggling in a relationship, you won’t have to ask yourself, “Is it them or is it me? Or are we just incompatible?” You’ll be able to make distinctions that are clear and that will provide you with the tools you need to create change.

On the deepest level, all humans have the same basic relationship requirements when it comes to enjoying a felt sense of safety and closeness with our loved ones. Underneath our different personalities and insecurities and desires, we all speak the same language and each of us can learn to work with our own wiring to achieve the relationship harmony we’re yearning for, even if we haven’t been able to find it on our own. This truth applies if you’re single and seeking a relationship, in a relationship that has been struggling for years or decades, just out of a relationship and looking for answers, or somewhere in between.

If we all have the same relationship needs, why are love and romance so complicated? The truth is, they don’t need to be. The problem is that we live in a world where it’s rare for a person to be in touch with their greatest, yet most basic, needs. Most of us have never learned how to label our needs, and we’ve never learned to notice our needs on the bodily level on which they occur. Without that awareness and without those words, it’s very difficult to accurately and authentically communicate your needs to someone else. And it’s equally difficult to be responsive to the needs of your partner, even if you desperately want to be, if they can’t tell you what they need with accuracy and authenticity.

For example, consider how many times a friend has asked you, “Do you feel emotionally validated in your relationship?” Probably never. But emotional validation (along with understanding) is arguably the single most important element of a truly satisfying relationship. And even if some enlightened soul did ask if you feel emotionally validated in your relationship, you might not know how to answer.

Feeling emotionally validated is an attachment need—it’s one of a handful of essential attachment needs in a relationship. When explaining attachment needs, I find it useful to start with the phrase “to feel close to you, I need…” For example, “to feel close to you I need to feel validated”; “to feel close to you, I need to know you appreciate me and see my efforts”; “to feel close to you, I need to know you respect and value me”; “to feel close to you, I need to know my needs matter to you”; or “to feel close to you, I need to know you can understand me.” We’ll talk more extensively about attachment needs later in the book, but for now it’s important to know that each partner must have the felt sense of their attachment needs being met in order for their relationship to be close, fulfilling, and harmonious.

But what exactly is a “felt experience”? Think of it like this: You don’t merely know you’re hungry; you also feel hungry. Your brain and body work together: your body has a felt sensation and your brain calls it “hungry.” From the time you learned to speak, you’ve been able to put words to your feelings of hunger because you were taught, time and again, to associate the word hunger with the feeling of hunger. Thus, you have no problem saying “I’m hungry,” and from there formulating a plan to feel the opposite feeling: satiated. The same logic applies to attachment needs. If you were lucky enough to grow up with adults who were relatively emotionally savvy, they were able to recognize your felt sense of emotional pain associated with distress and help you learn to put words to the experience, just as they taught you how to connect hunger the feeling with hunger the word. They might have said, “Are your feelings hurt? Do you not know that you’re important to me right now?” or “Do you feel misunderstood right now?” If you didn’t get this experience, you’re not alone.

While you may not have words for what your attachment needs are on a conscious level, your nervous system, the most primitive part of who you are, knows exactly what they are, and your nervous system will have a strong physiological response when they’ve gone unmet—your body might tense up, your breath will quicken, your heart rate will increase. Conversely, when your attachment needs are met, your nervous system will feel warm and soothed (or at least an absence of tension), signaling to you that you are safe and secure. This is the good stuff.

Through the lens of attachment theory, all relationship behaviors are attempts to experience, maintain, gain, or regain closeness and security with our loved ones. In an environment of attachment insecurity, dysfunctional relationship behavior is a misguided attempt to get attachment needs met. When your needs are met, you feel safe, and that creates an environment of security in your relationship. Underlying every fight, argument, silent treatment, passive-aggressive comment, and attack is an unmet attachment need. You’ll learn much more about these misguided attempts as you read this book—you’ll begin to understand why your partner yells at you to try to draw you closer or shuts down during an argument in order to try to protect the relationship. I’m not excusing or condoning these behaviors, but understanding them through the lens of attachment is the key to finding better ways to achieve the same goals.

There’s much more, however, to this work than knowing about how attachment problems affect your relationship. Secure Love is ultimately a book about learning to do what you need to do to create a healthier relationship. This is a couples therapy book, designed to walk partners through the work I do in my practice with couples. Can you benefit from this material if you aren’t in a relationship? Absolutely. The material is universal. If you aren’t in a relationship, you can use this information to understand how your childhood attachment experiences have shown up in past relationships and/or how they might show up in future relationships. You can use this information to improve your relationship with yourself. After all, self-relationship and self-care are every bit as much of a part of relationship health with a partner as they are a part of self-work. You can use this information as a guide to know more about what you want out of a future partner, and how to give a future partner your best self. Whether you’re in a relationship or not, think of this as a relationship instruction manual, and the instructions are written through the lens of attachment theory. After all, all relationships are under the influence of attachment energy at some level, and as grandiose as it sounds, I truly believe this book is written for anyone who wants to learn how to connect.

If you grew up having a felt sense of your needs being met by your parents or caregivers, as an adult you’ve likely gravitated to people in the world who know how to meet your needs, and you know how to meet theirs. You do this without even having to think about it. Your nervous system tells you what feels good, and you are free to trust yourself. You have a secure attachment, and you find yourself in relationships that are also securely attached. For those of you who fall into this category, this book will give you more specific details about why you are securely attached, and how to foster even more fulfillment in your relationship. Secure attachment is on a spectrum—no couple has a perfect relationship, and sometimes life stressors come along that make it hard for partners to fully show up for each other, which can impact their attachment bond. My belief is that the more information you have about how relationships work, the more prepared you’ll be to navigate the inevitable challenges, and we all have room to grow.

If, on the other hand, you grew up in a home where most of the time you didn’t feel responded to when in need, that there wasn’t space for your feelings, or you felt devalued, unseen, unheard, misunderstood, shamed, invalidated, and/or like your needs were put on the back burner, you likely find relationships that may feel good at first, but eventually devolve into varying degrees of distress. In this case, you have an insecure attachment, and together with your insecurely attached partner (most people with insecure attachments pair up with other insecurely attached partners) you find yourself in a relationship that is stuck. You’re probably acutely aware of how painful this type of relationship can be, especially when it comes to conflict and communication breakdowns. At the same time, you might have little sense of what the secure alternative actually feels like. Believe me, you are not alone. Statistically speaking, at least 50 percent of the population has an insecure attachment.

The good news is that if you are insecurely attached, you don’t have to spend the rest of your life this way—triggered, distressed, and confused in your relationship, with an overactive nervous system. You also don’t have to shut down your innate desire to connect, be close, and get your very human attachment needs met. This book will help you understand what type of insecure attachment you have, why and how it came to be, and how to move into a secure relationship with yourself and your partner. You no longer have to feel lonely even when you’re not alone, or that you’re broken. You can find a relationship that is nurturing and bonding. I know this to be true because every day I help couples go through this transformation.

When I decided to become a therapist, I adamantly did not want to work with couples. After earning my master’s degree, I was enjoying working with individuals, but to earn my full licensure, I needed clinical hours with couples. So I scheduled my first session and felt a little (okay, a lot) demoralized; I didn’t realize how hard couples therapy is, how many moving parts there are to manage. The upside to my demoralization was that I felt challenged, and I thrive on challenge. Within a week of that first session, I flew from Los Angeles, where I lived at the time, to Bozeman, Montana, which happened to be hosting the earliest available, entry-level training for Emotion-Focused Therapy for Couples (EFT), a type of therapy created by Dr. Sue Johnson that uses attachment theory to help couples grow toward secure attachment.

While the training was the first step of many more years and hundreds of hours of additional training, individual supervision, and clinical experience, I returned to LA with a passion for the work because I saw the power and incredible results of applying attachment theory to a relationship, and giving couples the tools and words to create emotional safety. During my first couples session after the training, I witnessed the bonding effect that attachment work can have on a couple, even in only one hour. I realized how gratifying it was when a couple leaves my office feeling closer and safer with each other than they did when they came through the door. Working with relationships through the lens of attachment makes this possible.

After returning home from that first EFT training, I stopped accepting individuals as new clients and officially became all couples, all the time.

What I love about EFT is that it’s as much about self-healing as it is about relationship healing. I also appreciate that by working with couples, instead of sending my clients home to partners who aren’t on the same growth trajectory, as is the case with individual work, I get to send them home with each other, as a couple with a shared experience, a deeper connection, and solid communication skills.

The journey that couples and I take during their course of therapy is similar to the trajectory we’ll go through together in Secure Love. I first want to know about each partner’s attachment history. I’m especially interested in learning about their childhood attachment relationships. Part 1 of Secure Love is meant to mirror this part of the process, so that you and your partner can better understand, through the lens of attachment, what each of you have brought to the relationship from your pasts. To make this process even more relatable for you, I’ve included many case studies from the real couples I’ve worked with (the stories of the couples and individuals I write about are authentic, though names and most identifying details have been changed, and some examples represent composites).

In Part 2 we’re going to learn about how each of your pasts, plus your present reality, come together to take on repetitive, patterned, negative cycles of communication. We’ll dig into what negative cycles of communication are, how they work, and how to spot yours. Then we’ll look at how to prevent and interrupt your negative cycles, and how to repair from them when they do happen. I’ll offer you the tools to create attachment-friendly environments, the kind of environments that will reduce your conflict, create unbreakable bonds, and help you find solutions to your problems.

In Part 3 we’ll address some real-world issues that can interact with the negative communication cycle and exacerbate it or perhaps throw a wrench in your conflict-resolution intentions. We’ll cover some universal issues, like sex, as well as some unique challenges, such as trauma and addictions. I’ll provide you with insight and guidance for how to course-correct if you’re not seeing results, and, finally, I’m going to give you some very specific scripts to set up hard conversations for success.

Deep into my couples therapy career, I decided to create an Instagram account as an intellectual and creative outlet, but also because I wanted to share the tools I was giving my clients with a wider audience. With “The Secure Relationship,” I offer information that every couple can use, whether or not they are in therapy, covering topics like “are you emotionally available?” “responding to your partner’s reaches for connection,” and “when I’m sorry might not be enough.” I’ve included similar graphics and easy-to-use scripts in this book to help you digest this advice readily. If my social media posts are quick hits into these topics, this book is the deep dive, but just as simple to put into action.

By the end of this book, you will not know you’re in a better relationship; rather, you will have learned to find, recognize, and re-create moments of connection, safety, and security. You will have learned how to make this experience the undercurrent in your relationship, so that it exists whether the two of you are on a romantic vacation together, working through a difficult problem, or even when you’re simply going about daily life not thinking about the relationship at all. You will also have grown within yourself, so you feel safe and comfortable in your own skin, and you can bring that comfort into all your relationships. This is the root of true connection. This is secure love.





PART ONE

Understanding Your Needs





CHAPTER 1 The Problem Beneath the Problem





“The problem is not the problem.”



Hi, I’m glad you’re home,” Jen says to her husband, Andrew, as he walks in the door and puts his keys on the table to greet her. “But you put your keys on the table again. I’ve asked you a hundred times to put them on the hook. That’s why we call it the ‘key hook.’ ”

“Really?” Andrew responds. “I just walked in the door. I almost always put them on the hook. You really need to bring this up the second I get home?”

“Almost always? Hardly. More like ‘never,’ ” Jen says. “It might be a small thing to you but to me it’s a big deal. I’m the only one who picks things up around here.”

You may have heard the phrase “The problem is not the problem” before, especially if you’ve been in therapy. When partners are fighting—whether they’re arguing over money, parenting, where to live, in-laws, sex, or taking out the trash—the conflict is almost never about the issue at hand. Don’t get me wrong, issues at hand are important. The trash does need to be taken out, bills do need to get paid, kids do need to be parented, and overall fairness does matter. The bigger problem, however, is what’s blocking all of the issues at hand from being worked through in a way that doesn’t harm the relationship bond. Only when the bigger problem is addressed can the issues at hand be worked through. The bigger problem, the problem underneath the problem, is almost always one of communication, which we see here in a typical argument between this couple, Andrew and Jen.

But it often doesn’t stop here:

“Give me a break, Jen,” Andrew sighs. “It doesn’t matter how much I do, you’ll find something to complain about. What about last weekend when I cleaned out the garage? And now I’m in trouble over a key hook?”

“Why do you have to turn everything back on me?” Jen asks, getting more agitated. “Why can’t you just own the fact that you don’t care about the keys? Or about what I want?”

“Because you’re being irrational!” Andrew blurts out.

Jen is infuriated. “Why can’t you be more like my sister’s husband? He actually supports her!” At this point, Andrew, sensing the escalation, switches gears. “Fine, here, I’ll put the keys on the hook. Now can we just move on?”

Jen isn’t buying it. She tells Andrew he’s patronizing her.

“I give up,” Andrew says. “There’s no making you happy when you’re in one of these moods.” Andrew leaves the room, leaving Jen fuming on her own.

I’m guessing you can relate to some version of this conflict, even if the arguments in your relationship are about something entirely different. Andrew and Jen’s conversation started out about the keys but in a matter of minutes spiraled into a heart-wrenching battle of emotional weapons and protections, including blame, shame, defensiveness, criticism, and deflection. The episode ended in a silence more deafening than the actual fight. Andrew and Jen may not even remember what started the fight in the first place. What they do remember is how they felt: angry, disconnected, lonely, unappreciated, unseen.

Throughout the evening Andrew and Jen remain disconnected. The next day, when they’ve each cooled off enough that the immediate tension has lessened, they miss each other and try to move forward. They go through the motions, and although the keys are in the right place, cracks of resentment have appeared in the couple’s otherwise solid bond. Still, they don’t want to revisit the conversation for fear of another blowup. The fight is over, but the conflict is not resolved.

This episode, or some variation of it, is surprisingly common among couples. Yet, when you’re in it, it’s easy to feel like you’re the only one—that your relationship is doomed; that something must be wrong with you. I’m here to tell you, that’s not the case. I see clients in situations like these all the time. You are not alone.

Maybe this type of interaction describes your past instead of your present… you used to fight, but you got tired and gave up. Instead of arguing, you and your partner just coexist in the same space. You live in a chronic state of emotional disconnect, punctuated by periods of higher tension. It might seem different than Jen and Andrew on the surface—instead of yelling about the misplaced keys, you are silently resigned to putting them back yourself—but couples in this “coexisting” state are also lost in their conflict. The difference is that instead of addressing their problems with escalation, they disengage. The results, however, are the same: real issues don’t get resolved, resentment builds, and connection suffers.

These two situations—constant escalating conflict or persistent disengagement—are what usually drive couples to seek out my help. By the time they’re sitting on the couch across from me, the relationship has gotten so bad that they assume they’re just incompatible.

The good news is that most of the time, incompatibility isn’t the issue at all. Instead, it’s about using communication to create attachment-friendly environments and secure attachments. What Andrew and Jen need, what so many couples need, is a way to better reach each other.





The Real Problem


Millions of couples are stuck in cycles like Jen and Andrew’s. You don’t have to share their circumstances—a traditional American heterosexual relationship—to relate to their predicament. Maybe you’re in a heterosexual relationship, but you live in India, or Germany, or Argentina, and your relationship has a different cultural flavor than most of the examples in this book. Maybe you’re an LGBTQ+ couple. Or maybe there’s no way to define you other than as two humans in a relationship who love each other and want to make it work. Every example you will read in this book is specific but is also universal. We all have our own problems and our own circumstances, but no matter if you’re gay or straight, in a first marriage, third marriage, or you’ve never been married, these dynamics will affect you. The truth is, your exact circumstances matter far less than your emotional state.

Couples like Jen and Andrew might fight about parenting, bicker about finances, or disengage completely because they feel so far apart. Some couples read books, learn to use “I-statements,” and set better boundaries in an effort to address the problem. Those strategies occasionally work as temporary Band-Aids, but the truth is, we can’t permanently fix the surface arguments until we get to the root issue. And that issue, almost always, is attachment insecurity.

Attachment, at its most basic, is the quality of our bond with the core figures in our lives, and it comes alive during each and every interaction. People who are attached, or attachment bonded, depend on each other for emotional support. In practical terms, this means, for example, that they know they’re seen and understood, they know they’re appreciated and valued, they know they can access support when they need it. The most powerful attachment bonds exist between either parents and young children or romantic partners, because these are the people we depend on most in a lifetime. In romantic relationships, where attachment bonds are reciprocal (versus parent-child relationships, where the parent is responsible for the child but not the other way around), the bond is strongest when each party’s attachment needs are being met. We’ll do a more thorough exploration into attachment needs in the next chapter, but globally speaking, this means partners can reach and respond to each other’s emotional bids for comfort and connection, and can navigate and resolve conflict with emotional safety. They can give and receive love, and when things get hard, they fight fair. All of this leaves them feeling confident in their connection, and secure in their attachment.

Romantic attachment does not exist in a vacuum, because both you and your partner came to your relationship with baggage from your childhood and impactful adult (or teen) romantic relationships. Nobody escapes it; it’s just a matter of degree. Not all the baggage is inherently negative; it just is what it is—baggage. We enter relationships with varying levels of trust of others and of ourselves, met or unmet attachment needs from childhood, communication patterns, self-beliefs, ways of managing our emotions, and learned behaviors. We also attract, more or less, our same level of growth, even when it shows up very differently. Attachment insecurity is on a spectrum and, while there are always exceptions, the degree to which someone has an insecure attachment is likely the degree to which their partner will also have an insecure attachment. But feeling secure in your attachment isn’t only about your current relationship—your past will always affect your present.

When arguments escalate in the way that Jen and Andrew’s did, what couples are really battling is an insecure attachment. They are expressing how much they need each other and how devastating it is to be lost, disconnected, and alone. They use surface content—keys, bills, parenting, and so on—as code to talk about the fears and unmet needs that they can’t effectively express. Then, to shield against the pain of not getting what they need, partners put up “protective stances”—loud protests, walking away, shutting down—to stave off vulnerability and pain at all costs. But here’s the problem: by protecting themselves from pain, they’re also blocking connection.

With all that in mind, consider Jen and Andrew’s fight in a new way.

Andrew comes home excited to spend the evening with Jen. When Jen scolds him about the keys, he feels deflated, as if he got it wrong again. As a child, Andrew could never “get it right” for his mom, so Jen is hitting a wound. Andrew’s body gets tense. His subconscious monologue says, “Maybe if I can convince Jen I’m not the bad guy, I won’t have to stand here feeling like she sees me as a failure yet again, which isn’t fair considering how hard I work to get it right for her.” And so, he defends himself.

But Jen is also excited to see Andrew. She came home early from work to pick up the house so they could relax together. Being organized is part of her self-care. Jen knows Andrew doesn’t share her same standards, but it’s important for her to feel supported in small ways. She’s not asking for much, she tells herself. When she sees the keys hit the table, her own childhood wound—feeling unseen, unsupported, not responded to—flares. She says to herself, “I’ve tried so hard to get him to hear me. He knows how important this is to me, so he must just not care.” Jen feels desperate to get Andrew to see what’s really happening so that he’ll reassure her.

Jen and Andrew go back and forth, trying to reach each other. Jen needs to know she’s cared for and to have her feelings validated. Andrew needs to know that not only does she see him as worthy, but that she trusts his love and care for her are real. Yet no matter how hard they try, they can’t reach each other. They are stuck in their protective stances, battling for something that feels like life or death in the moment: attachment security. They are looking for a seemingly simple message: “I’m loved, I’m understood, I’ll be responded to when I reach for you, I’m getting it right.” Instead they push each other away and reinforce each other’s attachment fears.

Eventually Jen and Andrew make up, or at least move on, but the damage to their attachment bond is done and they don’t know how to repair it. The same conflict will resurface in the same pattern, indefinitely, until they learn how to stay connected during conflict.

I want you to imagine you’re having a conversation with a partner—current, former, or even future. You’re talking about a stressful situation at work. After explaining the problem, your partner tells you you’re seeing it all wrong—that you should just be grateful to have a job in the first place. You try to protest, but they accuse you of being oversensitive to feedback.

How do you feel? Unseen? Frustrated? Confused? Maybe all of the above.

Now what do you notice happening inside of you? Most people feel a tightening, maybe in their chest or throat. Some report feeling still or caught off guard. This is the felt experience of an attachment rupture. When enough of these ruptures happen in a relationship, when they create a climate of overall unsupportiveness, when they don’t get repaired along the way, they reinforce an already insecure attachment.

Some of you reading this book are struggling with more serious issues than where to put the keys: infidelity, chronic physical or mental illness, blended-family issues, military deployment, addictions, extended family concerns, just to name a few. I can’t change that reality for you, but what I can do—and what I hope we’ll do here together—is help you find a way to buffer your relationship from the negative impact of these external stressors. Why is secure attachment especially important when life is throwing curveballs? Because the connection and support that partners derive from a securely attached relationship helps them feel more confident, competent, and resilient. If you want to heal from past wounds and transgressions, I’d like to help you understand what that process looks like. The events themselves might continue to be difficult, but the relationship doesn’t have to be. In fact, your relationship can be a source of strength and support as you weather the challenges of life. You and your partner can learn to face the world as a team.

I’m not saying that all couples should stay together at all costs. I don’t believe that. Some challenges are too much to overcome. And sometimes, the problem actually is the problem. Partners can have disagreements that are true deal-breakers; disagreements where there is no room for compromise. They love each other, but one wants children, the other doesn’t; one wants to live in the city, the other wants to stay off the grid; one can’t get over a past affair, the other says it’s time to move on. Sometimes there is real incompatibility, or the wounds are too great for trust to ever rebuild. We’ll talk later about what to do in these instances, but for now I just want to validate that some couples do face insurmountable challenges.

When all outside circumstances are equal, however, some couples will make it while others may not. So what are the surviving and thriving couples doing differently? Multiple factors are at play, but what’s certain is that these couples know how to avoid negative communication cycles like the one that plagued Andrew and Jen. That alone dramatically increases their odds. Because no single event takes down a relationship. Negative communication cycles, on the other hand, absolutely do.





Secure Love


Let’s revisit that same exercise, the one where you tell your partner about a stressful work problem. Imagine now that as you talk, you can tell your partner is really hearing you. As you speak they reassure you that your feelings are valid and reasonable.

How do you feel? Probably cared for and understood; seen and valued.

What do you notice in your body? When I’m doing speaking engagements and I ask audience members to do this exercise, I get a lot of similar answers: a warm feeling, an ease of tension, a lightening of the shoulders. Sit with your body for a minute. Imagine your partner’s loving face as you talk. Notice what happens inside you. This is the felt experience of a secure attachment.

Relationship satisfaction is intrinsically linked to secure attachment. Partners who are securely attached are reliable sources of intimacy, support, and comfort. During conflict, securely attached partners are less negative and reactive. They are able to hold positive images of each other even in the face of distress, and show more warmth and affection than insecure couples. Even their facial expressions are less hostile, and they have more confidence they’ll get through the conflict without harming their bond. While all couples experience conflict, securely attached couples do so less often because they’re less likely to experience missteps as rejections. This is partially due to each partner’s high self-esteem as an individual.

In a secure relationship, each partner shows up as their best self, not as a way to get something in return, but out of love and the desire to connect. They share a rich variety of thoughts and emotions with each other and respond to each other with care and sensitivity. They work to meet the other’s needs for sexual connection and physical affection, even when those needs aren’t the same as their own. Each partner is willing to make appropriate sacrifices for the greater good of the relationship. They support each other’s needs for autonomy and the exploration of separate interests. Each partner takes responsibility for their part in maintaining connection and being easy to love. They work to understand each other and validate each other’s feelings. They have each other’s backs and approach life as a team. They have fun together. Securely attached couples make hard decisions together in a way that might lead to disappointment, but not to resentment. They are each other’s primary support system, but each partner also has support systems outside the relationship.

Couples with secure attachments aren’t perfect, because no couple is perfect. What I’ve found in my work is that couples who have a secure attachment, even the ones who don’t seem to have a lot in common, are able to draw on the health of their relationship to find ways to meet each other when they don’t see eye to eye. Couples with a secure attachment bond generally maintain a felt experience of connection and comfort in their relationship. They’re not always thinking about their partner (though when they do, the thoughts are predominantly positive—a natural result of met attachment needs) and they don’t spend all their time actively working on and talking about the relationship, either. Rather, they know how to just be with each other. They recognize that perfect doesn’t exist and so they aspire to something realistic—which is its own version of perfect.





How Do We Get There?


Some of you are in relationships where you feel close and connected most of the time, but when you bump up against hard topics there are explosive fights. Some of you are in relationships with a constant underscore of tension, punctuated by moments of intensity. Some of you don’t fight often, but you feel more disconnected than you’d like. And still others of you have your own versions of dysfunction. Regardless of the circumstances, the solution is the same: begin communicating with each other, verbally and nonverbally, in the ways we’ll cover in this book. By putting the tools into practice, you can learn to find the connection and harmony you’ve been looking for and begin to solve your “issues at hand” with greater ease. This is the path toward creating secure attachment.

To do this, we must minimize what’s not working in your relationship and build up what will. In the chapters to come, we’ll examine how each partner’s attachment style is showing up in your relationship. We’ll consider the attachment bonds from your childhood, which helped protect you at the time, but now need to be rewired. We’ll replace old, ineffective behaviors with new productive ones, and all the while build up emotional closeness. We’ll learn to communicate from a place of vulnerability, which is the crux of this work. If the word vulnerability makes you cringe, know that it doesn’t mean opening up in a way that feels inauthentic. Vulnerable communication is simply the opposite of protective communication; you share what you can when you can. You take the risks needed to show up in your relationship in a new way, with less criticism or less defensiveness, even when it initially feels really uncomfortable to do so. Vulnerability heals.

Real relationship change takes place in two ways. The first is a top-down approach, where we change behavior in order to improve the climate of the relationship. This is the focus of many common forms of couples therapy. Couples are instructed to say and do things in new ways, and by making these changes, they create safety and shift the underlying health of the relationship. The other approach is bottom-up, in which we work directly on attachment gunk underlying the behaviors, in hopes that by healing what’s underneath, the behavior will shift on its own.

Which is better? Neither. We need both.

Imagine you’re in an argument with your partner. In an effort to prevent further damage, you disengage and walk away, feeling defeated and unheard. This feels horrible. Nothing about it is fulfilling. But it’s effective in the moment to protect the relationship from damage inflicted through criticism, yelling, name-calling, uncontrolled expressions of emotion, shaming, and angry rants. Yes, you may have prevented something really ugly, but at what cost? The cost is resolution and connection. If you stop there, your relationship will suffer. Your partner feels unheard, ignored, and abandoned. So if you both engage only in a top-down approach, without diving into the underlying conflicts, healing probably won’t happen. But there is a middle ground between fighting and disengagement, and secure attachment lies in this middle ground. When you complement the behavioral work with deeper work intended to help you both understand why you go into protective stances and empathize with those stances, you can approach the argument and one another with more openness. We can start healing the underlying causes that spurred the argument in the first place. In other words, changing behavior is more about damage control than it is about creating fulfilling relationships, but damage control helps create space to do the deeper work.

I will walk you through both approaches, giving specific advice on what not to do in your relationship and what to do instead. For the work to be thorough, and the change to be lasting, we do the deeper work, too: reframing ourselves, our partners, and our relationships through an attachment lens. The behavioral work prevents damage; the attachment work builds bonds, and bonds build resilience.

Before we can start, we need to “buy the reframe,” as we say in emotion-focused therapy. Change can’t happen until you reframe your relationship: your partner is not the enemy. Instead, your negative communication cycle is the enemy. Destructive words and behaviors are the enemy. For relationship change to happen, we need to move away from the idea that partners are enemies who must protect themselves from each other. Once you accept this reframe, you can start to see how even the relationship behaviors that look the most vicious on the outside are in fact cries for security and closeness. When we view our conflict through an attachment lens, understanding that ultimately all humans want to bond and feel safe in their relationships, then the magic can begin.

One final note: though interpersonal relationships obviously involve more than one participant, I can’t understate the importance of focusing on your own self-growth when it comes to relationship improvement. All of our beliefs about what we can expect from other people are based on past experiences, and these experiences can cause us to react to our partners not as who they really are in the present moment, but as who we assume them to be according to our attachment understandings and personal history. This doesn’t always serve your relationship well, so it stands to reason that addressing these self-patterns is a crucial part of relationship healing. But remember, it’s not all-or-nothing: you brought your strengths to the relationship, too. One of those strengths is that you’re willing to read this book, which means you have grit and a desire to grow. Use your strengths to your advantage and work on the rest.

I offer you now the same note that I always end a couple’s first therapy session with: “As we proceed, keep in mind that I’m not going to try to convince you to stay in your relationship. That’s not my job. My job is to look underneath the surface, diagnose the attachment issues at play, and help couples communicate about their disagreements in a way that is mutually respectful and emotionally safe. When the communication is cleaned up, then and only then can we know what else might be getting in the way.”

Once you learn to communicate with your partner in a healthy way, you can observe and experience your relationship from a place of clarity. When communication is improved and attachment bonds are solidified, partners are far more likely to be able to work through their differences.

I’ll end this chapter with a question most of you are asking: How long does it take? The answer to this question depends on the couple. Not only does each couple start this work at a different place, but so does each partner. All relationships can grow. What it takes is access to helpful information, commitment to working on it, and practice. So when you think about how long it will take to see results, which is a legitimate question to ask, think about the following factors: one, if your relationship feels good 10 percent of the time, and that number goes up to 20 percent, that is growth. What I’ve found is that if you keep doing what you’re doing, some growth will usually lead to more growth. Two, growth is never linear; instead, growth happens as a positive trend with peaks and valleys—two steps forward, one step back. Three, each partner will likely grow at different rates. And lastly, when you’re putting the right elements into the relationship, especially at the beginning, you might not see results even when the results are there. Think of it like planting seeds. On top of this, sometimes things get worse before they get better because change, even positive change, can make people nervous when it’s unfamiliar. Try not to let this demoralize you and maintain your confidence that what you’re doing is healthy, even if it’s not readily apparent. You’re committing to positive change for yourself and your relationship.





CHAPTER 2 Understanding Attachment Theory





When you reached for emotional comfort or connection growing up, how were you met by the adults around you? When you were sad, did your parents or caregivers consistently offer warmth? Or rejection? When you felt insecure, did you feel valued? Or pushed away? Did you get the message that your feelings matter and deserve attention, or were you told (if not in so many words) that you’re “too much”? Were your feelings validated and tended to? Or were you distracted from your feelings and told “don’t cry—here, have a cookie”? Or, a third option, were you shamed and left alone with your feelings, perhaps “you need to go to your room to be angry”?

To understand how you show up in your relationships today, we have to start with your family of origin. The way in which your closest caregivers responded to your emotional needs will absolutely influence how you interact with loved ones as an adult. Childhood experiences set the stage for what you expect, or don’t expect, in your most intimate adult relationships, as well as how responsive you can be to your partner. The human brain learns at its most rapid pace throughout childhood, so direct emotional experiences during this time send an important message: “Here’s what relationships are like, and here’s what I need to do to navigate them. Here’s what’s necessary to survive this environment.” Whether you were raised by caregivers who were emotionally available or unavailable, your brain learned to wade through relationships according to those early templates.

My curiosity as a therapist, when I start working with any couple, is about the overall emotional climate during each partner’s childhood. How much of the good stuff did you get? Was it enough? How much of the time did you feel a sense of warmth in your home life? How much of the time did you feel anxious and unseen? How often did anyone help you find and put words to your inner experiences like joy, jealousy, rage, excitement? How often were those feelings validated? “I understand you’re mad; I get mad, too. I can’t let you drive after dark until you have more experience, but your anger and disappointment make sense to me and you’re not wrong to feel that way.” Did you feel safe and like you’d be protected if bad things happened? Did anyone try to help you make sense of it when bad things did happen? Understanding the answers to these questions helps me understand what each partner needs today, and helps us get to the root of any communication breakdowns.

I recently sat down with a couple, Reyna and Sabino, who came to me because they couldn’t stop fighting. The cycle was always the same no matter who “started it” in any given moment. Reyna would end up getting mad and lashing out. Sabino would end up getting defensive and eventually shutting down. Early in our session, I asked each partner to describe the emotional climate in their childhood home. Sabino told me he couldn’t remember. In fact, he couldn’t recall ever being distressed as a child. “If hypothetically, you did experience distressing feelings from time to time,” I said, “what would have happened if you tried to talk to your parents about them?”

“My mom might have been there for me; it’s hard to remember,” Sabino said. “Not my dad. My dad would’ve told me to toughen up. I would’ve felt like he saw me as a baby. I always wanted my dad to see me as strong. He really valued strength.”

“So, you know your dad wouldn’t have been a source of comfort, and would’ve possibly been a source of shame, and you’re not entirely sure whether your mom would’ve been comforting or not,” I summarized. “It sounds to me like there’s a good chance that talking about your feelings would’ve put you at risk for feeling rejected. What’s it like for you today when Reyna gets upset with you? Does that feel like being rejected, too?”

“Yes,” Sabino said, looking down at the floor. “It’s awful.”

“I’m sure it is awful,” I said. “But as I learn to know you, it makes sense to me that you learned early on to avoid feeling rejected. That was your young brain’s way of protecting yourself. Your brain said ‘feelings aren’t safe; feelings lead to rejection.’ So right here and now, in your relationship with your wife, you’re still keeping feelings so far away.”

When Sabino told me he couldn’t remember having big emotions, what I heard was “my emotions didn’t matter from an early age; I stuffed them away before I even learned to talk.” After all, why feel emotional pain if nobody is around to provide support? Why not take the second-best option, and disavow painful feelings altogether (albeit subconsciously) and stay safe from the despair of emotional rejection and disappointment? This defensive strategy worked; it protected little-boy Sabino. But the downside is that present-day Sabino doesn’t know how to emotionally engage with himself or his partner, and it’s taking a toll on his life and relationship.

Sabino’s wife, Reyna, had a different childhood experience. “My family was dysfunctional, still is,” she commented. “I’m really close to my mom and sisters but there’s constant drama. I’m trying to set boundaries with them, but they always make me feel guilty if I don’t join them in whatever is going on at the moment.”

“What was it like growing up?” I asked. “Did things feel chaotic?”

“Yes. My mom was anxious about everything and treated my dad like her servant,” Reyna explained. “He did whatever she said, but then would have enough and blow up.”

“Could you go to either of them for emotional comfort?”

“No, I was an emotional handful,” she said. “Everyone in the family jokes about it. I would get really upset, even all the way up into my teens, and they were always trying to get me to calm down… bribing me, punishing me… they tried everything. Sometimes my mom could be comforting, but most of the time she just got upset right along with me.”

“What happened if you stayed quiet and didn’t get upset?” I asked.

“I’ve never thought about that. Probably nothing. Nobody ever noticed me until there was a crisis,” Reyna said.

“So you had to choose between feeling deprived of attention or ‘going big’ to be noticed?”

“Yes, two bad options,” she said. “But it’s the same thing with Sabino. I feel like I have to get upset for him to hear me.”

Like Sabino, Reyna’s childhood attachment was manifesting in her marriage. As a kid she had two options: get big—what she called being an “emotional handful”—or feel emotionally abandoned. It’s too painful for children to feel abandoned, so Reyna’s childhood brain learned that getting big (which for Reyna meant loud and emotional) was the way to get confirmation that she existed and mattered. It was how she got people to show up for her.

No parent is perfect. Even the most loving caregivers have moments when they are distracted, when they yell and wish they hadn’t, when they’ve had enough and tell their child to go to their room when what that kid really needs is to be pulled closer. No parent responds in the most loving, attuned way 100 percent of the time. And that’s okay! According to research, children only need to be responded to with attunement 50 percent of the time to develop a secure attachment. This is why I focus on overall childhood climate rather than isolated incidents.

The growing child’s brain is like a sponge. The child takes in all the information from their surrounding environment, for better and for worse, and it happens almost wholly out of conscious awareness. It’s a plan of efficiency—this unconscious learning keeps us from having to stop and ponder each decision and relearn information as we go. Imagine yourself as a four-year-old. By that age, you might have learned that the bathroom is down the hall, the hot water is on the left, the toothpaste in the top drawer. Thanks to your brain’s ability to download information and store it for future use, you didn’t need to spend precious mental energy considering your every move. Like your physical world, you learned to navigate your emotional world in the same way. You might have learned that when you were frustrated, you could seek help from a parent and feel supported. You might have learned that your dad got anxious when you got sad and so it might be best to hide your tears, or that when you showed your drawings to your mom, in an attempt to be seen and known, you’d feel the warmth of having been responded to. From all this information, you developed a set of emotional rules to serve you throughout life.

When I explain this idea to my clients, they often push back with questions about inborn temperament. Isn’t there something to the idea that who you are is a matter of nature, not nurture? Is it possible that Sabino was born with a detached disposition, or that Reyna was sensitive from day one? Yes and no.

We’re all born with a baseline temperament, but our environment will determine how that temperament manifests. In their landmark research on the interplay between a child’s inborn temperament and the environment they’re born into, childhood researchers Alexander Thomas and Stella Chess describe what’s called the “goodness of fit” between the temperament of a parent and that of their child. The idea is that in childhood, if you and your father have a “poor fit,” for example, then the interactions between the two of you will be strained. Strained relationships create more opportunities for strained communication, which creates a higher likelihood of unmet emotional needs, which will dramatically increase the odds of an insecure attachment. This is by no means the fault of the child, who innocently came into the world with a specific temperament, nor is it the “fault” of the parent, who may lack the skills to work with that challenge. But, while we want to move away from blame and instead focus on responsibility, individual attachment styles do develop in response to environment, which is created by adults. Adults are responsible for the environment they create, but that doesn’t mean they’re inherently bad, flawed, lazy, or uncaring people because they didn’t know how to get it right enough. They may just not have had the tools. Still, children look to caregivers to teach them how to express and manage their emotions. If a parent isn’t able to manage the child’s temperament in a healthy way, or even their own, it can create an environment that fosters an insecure attachment.

As we journey into attachment theory together, keep in mind that your parents’ behavior did not need to be intentional for you to develop an insecure attachment style. Most parents want the best for their children, but if one or both of your parents didn’t have secure attachments of their own, they were limited in their ability to create an emotionally secure environment in which you could emotionally thrive. You may have had extenuating circumstances in your life such as the death or chronic physical or mental illness of a parent, or even a natural disaster that affected your parent’s ability to be present for you emotionally. As we proceed through the book, especially as we dig into attachment styles, do your best to find compassion for your parents and for yourself—remember, most of the time we are all doing our very best with what we have. (If you’re a parent yourself, as many of you are, and are interested in learning about parenting your own child in a way that fosters secure attachment, I recommend the book Good Inside, by Dr. Becky Kennedy.)

Before you can apply attachment theory to your relationship in a practical way, first let’s understand the basic concept. Once you understand what attachment theory is, where it came from, and why it’s important, it can serve as a guide. You will begin to have a deeper understanding of why you are triggered in certain interactions, what might be going on for your partner when things get heated, and why you might find yourselves in a pattern you’re not yet sure how to break. Understanding the why behind your relationship behaviors and urges will make change so much easier. It will allow you to approach yourself and your partner with compassion, which is the first step toward finding the relationship harmony you’re longing for.





Attachment Theory History


In the mid-1900s, psychiatrist John Bowlby discovered that the “delinquent” adolescent boys he treated at a boys’ home in London often had one thing in common: what Bowlby called “maternal deprivation,” meaning loss of their mother, repeated separations from their mother, or being passed from one foster mother to another. From this observation he began to theorize that early childhood experiences in relationships can affect a person throughout their life. While this seems obvious to most of us today, it was novel at the time. Bowlby also theorized that we’re all born with an “attachment behavioral system” that motivates us to seek closeness with our attachment figures, much in the same way we are equipped with an appetite system in order to seek food.

The biology behind attachment theory is not very complicated, and most of us understand it intuitively: humans need other humans to survive and reproduce. Evolution favors whatever traits support reproduction of a species. Those early humans who had the healthiest and most cooperative relationships with other humans had an easier time getting food, making protective shelter, fighting off predators, and taking care of their young. And not only is it natural for humans to crave and seek out relationships, it’s also natural for them to experience high levels of distress when their relationships are under threat. When your partner isn’t returning your calls or responding to your texts like they normally do, or when you feel like you’re being unfairly criticized, you’re not “crazy,” irrational, too needy, or otherwise flawed because you feel uncomfortable. In fact, you’re wired to feel uncomfortable. That said, just because you feel an attachment threat doesn’t mean your attachment is truly under threat. Sometimes we perceive a threat when in reality there is none. For example, if your partner has a stern look on their face, you might feel triggered and think “oh no, they’re mad at me,” when they might just be in deep thought (this is why it’s so important for couples to learn to communicate through these “misses”).

Over time, the psychological community began to accept Bowlby’s ideas about the impact of early attachment. In the 1970s, he paired up with psychologist Mary Ainsworth to conduct the formal research that solidified attachment theory as a well-respected and highly useful lens through which to view relationships. This research led to the categorizations of attachment styles: secure, insecure-anxious, insecure-avoidant, and later, the fourth category of disorganized attachment. In the late 1990s, Sue Johnson, drawing on the work of Bowlby and Ainsworth—as well as that of researchers Cindy Hazan and Phillip Shaver, who first applied attachment theory to adult relationships—began researching ways to heal distressed couples using attachment theory. In 1988 Johnson developed what’s called Emotionally Focused Couples Therapy (EFT), a road map for therapists to use attachment theory to help couples heal. EFT helps couples understand how each partner’s attachment style is driving the poor communication that not only blocks resolution, but does a number on their emotional connection, safety, and support—all the things that give couples resilience to poor communication—and sets vicious cycles into motion. EFT takes the science behind attachment theory and puts it to practical use to help couples not just survive, but thrive. As an EFT therapist myself, I know firsthand how effective it is. For more information about EFT or to locate an EFT therapist in your area, visit ICEEFT.com.





Attachment Needs and Fears


In relationships, what we all want more than anything is to feel lovable for who we are on the inside and worthy for what we do on the outside. Beyond that, we want to use our lovable, worthy selves as a way to connect with the lovable, worthy selves of others, particularly our romantic partners. When we feel as if we’re seen by another person as worthy and lovable, we feel safe. Our nervous system says, “This person sees me as worthy and lovable, and people who are worthy and lovable are safe from rejection and abandonment, so therefore I’m safe.” For example, we thrive in the workplace when we know our employers and coworkers appreciate our work; it helps us feel worthy of the job. Our family members hopefully meet our need to feel lovable—accepted for who we are more than for what we do. Even if we fail, they will still love us. Virtually all relationship behaviors stem from this need to be viewed as worthy and lovable—or from the pain that arises when we feel we aren’t seen this way. These two needs are at the core of any individual’s set of attachment needs. And, the ability to intimately connect with others relies upon feeling worthy and lovable. Why? Because people who don’t feel worthy and lovable have to hide to feel safe from rejection and abandonment. Hiding is the antithesis to connection.

If we break down the needs to feel lovable and worthy into workable parts, we have attachment needs (sometimes called attachment longings), which are the building blocks of secure attachment. They are what you need in a relationship for you to feel close to your partner, and likewise what your partner needs to feel close to you. Closeness matters. When you feel close to your partner, you feel supported and safe. When we feel supported and safe, seen and accepted for the lovable, worthy person we are, we want to connect, which leads to more closeness. Connection is fulfilling. People who are fulfilled do better in their relationships and in the world beyond. They have better emotional, mental, and physical health. When we feel supported and safe, we work through life’s problems more easily.

How do you know when you’re close to someone? You probably haven’t thought about this explicitly—you probably “just know.” But let’s try to pinpoint what’s actually required for closeness. Think, for the moment, about your partner. Now ask yourself: “Do I look forward to seeing this person and talking to them? Do I seek them out when I need support? Do I share my thoughts and feelings with them? Do I feel like we’re a team? When things feel strained, do I have the urge to reconnect?” If, in the big picture of the relationship, both you and your partner answer yes to these questions most of the time, then most likely you feel close to each other. Closeness doesn’t just happen; closeness is earned through the way partners think and feel about each other, in the way they speak to each other, and in the ways they behave in the relationship.

Attachment needs are fairly consistent from couple to couple, although different partners might be more sensitive to particular attachment needs when they go unmet. You might be more sensitive to invalidation if you didn’t get enough of it during childhood, or you might be more focused on being seen as successful, because that’s how you felt worthy growing up. Some partners have a harder time trusting, because their caretakers often weren’t safe, while others are more in touch with their whole selves, and thus have access to a balance of needs.

The following is a list of various attachment needs. To understand your own, I like to use the phrase, “To feel close to you, I need to know…”

you value me and our relationship

you’ll respond to me in moments when I reach for you

you’ll reach to me for support in times of need

you appreciate me and my efforts

my needs as an individual matter to you

you hold me in high esteem

you are willing to see and understand me

my feelings are valid to you

you respect me

there’s a clear path to pleasing you

you see me as a successful partner

I can trust your love and loyalty

You trust my love and loyalty



When both partners’ attachment needs are met, and they trust they’ll be met in the future, they have a secure attachment. Conversely, when their needs aren’t met, and they can’t be sure they’ll be met in the future, they have an insecure attachment. Having met attachment needs is what ultimately helps partners feel loved and worthy in each other’s eyes, and from there they can experience the beauty of deep connection. If this sounds overwhelming, fear not. Relationships aren’t as mysterious as they can sometimes seem. Attachment needs are met through words, feelings, thoughts, and behaviors, and this book was written to help you know exactly what those are.

For now, know that secure relationships are less about how a relationship looks and more about how it feels, which is why understanding attachment needs on an intellectual level isn’t enough. We also need to feel, in the big picture of the relationship, that our attachment needs are met. If unmet attachment needs didn’t make us feel bad, they wouldn’t matter. But they do make us feel bad. Unmet attachment needs cause emotional pain, which manifests in our bodies. We tighten up, our throats get tight, we feel heavy, our limbs get tingly, our chests tighten, our heart rate soars, we have a sense of being deflated. This happens even if we might not be consciously aware it’s happening. Emotional pain makes us want to yell, tune out, cry, run, call names, hang up the phone, continue to fight, drink a glass of wine, go distract, and on and on.

Once you can articulate your attachment needs, you can begin to understand the awful feelings in your body that arise when they aren’t met. Those feelings are literally your nervous system flagging danger. Only when you understand your needs can you communicate them to your partner instead of acting out or saying things that push your partner away and make it less likely your attachment needs will be met. Only when you understand your own needs can you possibly know how to recognize, empathize with, and respond to your partner’s needs.

We will all, even the healthiest of couples, experience moments when one partner’s attachment needs aren’t met. These are called attachment ruptures, moments when one or both partners feel misunderstood, disrespected, invalidated, unsupported, unappreciated, or like their needs don’t matter. Does this mean all couples have insecure attachments? Luckily, it does not.

I like to use the analogy of climate versus weather. Couples with a secure attachment live in an overall climate of met attachment needs. Most of the time, each partner feels understood, appreciated, validated, and so on. However, even the most secure of couples will experience bad weather. When it arises, in the form of an attachment rupture, it’s an isolated event. The couple can make a repair and get back to their climate. On the other hand, when the overall climate of a relationship is such that partners are in a near-constant state of unmet needs, they have an insecure attachment.

This difference between relationship climate and weather can also help explain how you might start a relationship feeling close to your partner and then weeks, months, or years later find yourself feeling far from them. Early in relationships, when couples haven’t had enough unrepaired conflict and attachment ruptures built up, their needs are mostly met (and if not, they maintain hope they can figure it out together). But as unrepaired ruptures build up, they begin to take a toll on the relationship, causing even more ruptures, and eventually even feelings of despair and hopelessness. Eventually the moments of bad weather become the new climate.

Let’s talk briefly about the flip side of attachment needs: attachment fears. In general, needs and fears are two sides of the same coin. If you need something for survival, it stands to reason you’ll experience some level of fear if there is a threat to that need. Think about food. You need it for survival. If your food supply is threatened, it won’t take long for fear to kick in. The same is true for attachment. In order to feel safe in relationships, which is tied to our overall sense of safety, you need to have your attachment needs met and feel confident they will continue to be met in the future. When your attachment needs feel threatened in your relationship, you will experience some level of anxiety or fear. Humans will go to great lengths to avoid pain, so it only stands to reason that our attachment fears play an important role: to motivate us to repair our attachment bonds.

Now, for a moment of reassurance: having attachment needs doesn’t make you “needy.” Clients frequently ask me, “Isn’t it codependent to expect my partner to meet all of these needs for me?” But the answer is no. Met attachment needs (and we’re only talking about met attachment needs, not every single need a person has) are simply what’s necessary to feel close to another person. They don’t make you whole, but they do make a loving relationship whole. That doesn’t mean your partner has to love you before you can love yourself. Our partners’ love can help us love ourselves, or help us expand upon the love we already have for ourselves, but their love can’t make us love ourselves—that needs to be happening independent of them.

What about codependency? A lot of people erroneously assume that having attachment needs means they’re codependent. Codependency is a vague term with multiple definitions depending on who you ask. I define codependency as an overreliance on the feelings, thoughts, and behaviors of others to feel okay within oneself. Met attachment needs, on the other hand, are defined by the feelings, thoughts, and behaviors of your partner needed for you to feel close to them (and vice versa). If you’re worried about your attachment needs being a sign of codependency, ask yourself: “Can I feel close to a person who doesn’t respect me or appreciate me? Who doesn’t understand me or doesn’t even want to? Who can’t show up for me when I need support? Who doesn’t trust me? Who isn’t trustworthy?” Most people will have a hard time feeling close to anyone, especially their partner, when they don’t have an overall felt sense of these needs being met. And because the emotional stakes are highest in romantic partnerships, our attachment needs will be highest in romantic relationships.





The Attachment Behavioral System (ABS)


Do you know you’re hungry or do you feel hungry? Your body feels hungry without you ever needing to think “I’m hungry.” Most parents understand the importance of teaching their children to recognize their body’s signs of hunger: a grumbling belly, irritability, weakness, and food cravings. Why? Because babies aren’t born with the words for hunger; they have to be taught.

The same goes for attachment security. The only real difference is that most people aren’t raised to have words for our attachment needs. Our bodies feel the need, but there’s a disconnect between the felt sensation and the ability to communicate the felt sensation. But just like with hunger, sometimes we need conscious recognition before we can intentionally go about getting our need met. Most of us aren’t raised hearing the words, “Do you feel invalidated right now? I’m so sorry. Help me better understand your feelings so I can help you with them.” Or “Do you feel like your needs don’t matter to me? Oh, that’s hard. Let me reassure you that they do matter to me very much.” Or “I can see you’re really upset. Let’s talk about what you might be needing right now.”

Part of the brilliance of John Bowlby’s work on attachment was that he put words to the body’s attachment experience. He called it the attachment behavioral system (ABS). Similar to the body’s sexual system, which promotes survival by urging us to procreate, and the body’s appetite system, which promotes survival by motivating us to eat, the body’s attachment behavioral system motivates us to feel emotional distress when attachment is threatened, or when we perceive it to be threatened, and to feel that discomfort until we return to safety.

I mentioned earlier that understanding attachment needs, and being able to put words to them, is critical. The same is true of recognizing and naming your emotional distress. How can you ever learn to self-regulate, or reach for help for, what you can’t recognize and name, and instead what you only experience as shapeless “pain”? Imagine you step on a nail. Your body says, “Alert! Pain! It’s in our toe! Pull out the nail!” What if you just felt pain and that was it, with no idea what was really happening? You wouldn’t know to pull out the nail, and you’d continue to suffer. The same is true with ABS: you need to be able to understand and name what’s happening for you on an attachment level, so that you know what action you can take to soothe your attachment distress.





The Four Cs of Attachment


No two couples struggle with the same surface problems. Your neighbors can’t agree on saving versus spending. You and your partner are on the same page about finances, but you often find yourselves feeling emotionally distant from each other. You have a great sex life, but your sister and her partner have struggled with their sex life since their young children were born; yet they work well as a team in other areas, like household chores. You can hear your boss and his partner constantly bickering through the office door. You know they love each other and are highly committed, but things get really ugly when they fight. Your coworker’s partner just decided to become sober, but alcohol has been a big part of their recreational time together, and they’re struggling to navigate the change.

Each of these couples is almost certainly struggling with communication problems, and those communication problems are both fueled by, and maintained by, underlying attachment issues. But, as the examples show, attachment issues show up differently for different couples. Generally, attachment issues can be sorted into four buckets: Comfort, Connection, Cooperation, and Conflict. I call these areas the four Cs—pretty much any problem a couple struggles with will fit into at least one of them. Some couples will have attachment problems in all four Cs, and problems in one area can certainly bleed over into others. As a result, it’s not just important to know about the four Cs, but also to understand how they interact with each other. For example, researchers have found that couples’ ability to be supportive to each other (comfort) when discussing personal problems unrelated to the relationship predicted less negative emotion during conflict about the relationship one year later. That means that couples can increase the quality of emotional comfort outside of conflict to help future conflict be handled in a healthy way.

Understanding the four Cs will help you figure out where to focus your healing and repair; it might also help you better assess the overall health of your relationship, and more clearly see strengths you may have been overlooking.





Comfort


How well do you and your partner comfort each other when one of you is experiencing emotional or physical pain? For example, when you have a tense argument with your brother about something important to you, can you count on your partner to provide you with comfort instead of leading with advice? When your partner feels humiliated by their boss, are you able to manage your own anxiety (which might be motivated by thoughts like “what if they lose their job?”) so that you can show up with emotional presence? When your partner is sick, are you able to be sympathetic and supportive? Does it sometimes feel like your partner’s overreaction to your distress makes things worse?

When partners have a hard time comforting each other, they each end up alone with their problems. One of the many benefits of a relationship is having support when we’re upset. Emotional support might not fix the problem at hand, but it certainly helps us feel less alone and more regulated, which can help us face the problem with better clarity when the time comes—and, importantly, helps us feel close and supported by our partner, which bleeds over into other parts of the relationship.





Connection


Do you and your partner feel emotionally connected? Do you talk not just about the details of events in your life, but also the emotional meanings? I had a client who would come home and tell long stories about his day at work, usually about different versions of conflict with coworkers. His husband would try to stay engaged, but the interactions felt flat, and he would find himself drifting off. When my client noticed his husband drifting off, he felt rejected and alone. I worked with him on talking not just about the surface details of the story (“he said this, I said that”) but also to share his vulnerability around the events. He learned to say things like “I felt really humiliated when he said that,” which elicited his husband’s empathy and helped him stay engaged. Not only did they feel more connected, but by putting words to his feelings, my client was able to better understand himself and start to work through his own role in his relationship with his coworkers. Win-win.

Having fun together is also a great way to connect emotionally. Joy is bonding. This is why any relationship expert will encourage couples to get away from time to time to just enjoy life and each other. In the past, marriages were business arrangements, not love arrangements. Now we marry for love and friendship, and part of that means taking responsibility for our love and friendship. The only way to do this is to make space for connection. Moments of connection help couples be resilient to future stressful situations.

For most couples, physical connection is also vital. This includes sexual touch and connection, affectionate touch from holding hands to cuddling, and everything in between. Some partners feel most emotionally connected via physical connection. Sex and other forms of touch help them feel valued, comforted, wanted, and vitalized in the relationship. It soothes their nervous systems. As a couples therapist, I don’t want to see anyone only able to emotionally connect through sex, but that doesn’t downplay the fact that, for many people, direct body connection is as emotional as it is physical. When couples are having problems physically, meaning at least one partner is feeling physically neglected, it can be devastating to other parts of the relationship.





Cooperation


Cooperation has to do with how you and your partner live your lives as a team, make decisions together, and support each other in daily life. This might include keeping the home clean, navigating in-laws and extended family, finances, parenting, or where to live. Given the unlimited number of decisions couples face around these areas, it makes sense that attachment issues show up here. Underlying most conflict or distress that comes up around cooperation are questions like: Do my needs matter to you? Is your opinion valid to me, even if I don’t agree? Are you willing to compromise some of my wants and preferences for the good of the relationship? Am I?





Conflict


Conflict is about how couples manage when things aren’t going well in the other Cs. What happens when you don’t see eye to eye about parenting or household chores? How do you talk about it when you feel emotionally or sexually distanced? Are you able to talk about your problems from a place of emotional regulation—meaning you’re in control of your emotions, rather than overwhelmed by them—while still staying emotionally engaged? Or do you get stuck in blame, shame, defensiveness, or disengagement? Do you talk through things in a way that is mutually respectful even when you don’t agree, or do you find yourself in negative cycles that erode emotional safety and promote insecure attachment?

Every struggling couple will have problems with conflict. But once you learn how to conquer conflict—and you will!—you’ll be able to talk about your problems in the other Cs in ways that are far more likely to help you find healthy solutions.





Attachment Styles


Attachment styles largely determine how each partner will go about managing their wants, needs, and fears in the different areas—the different Cs—of their relationship.

How you connected with your parent or caregiver at a young age informs how you show up in a relationship as an adult. In the late 1970s, Mary Ainsworth decided to put Bowlby’s theory of attachment to the test and conducted the first study of attachment. From her research, she determined that while we all have the same basic attachment needs, different people have different attachment styles, or ways of managing their attachment needs, longings, and fears. These styles, set into motion during childhood, continue to adapt in response to romantic relationships during the teen and adult years. They affect how we love and feel loved, how we fight, how we repair, how we approach life, and how we reach for and respond to comfort and connection.

We’re going to do a deep dive into each style, and help you identify your own, in the next chapter. So for now, here’s a quick overview of each, since understanding these styles—and how they show up in your relationship—is why we’ve been digging into attachment theory in the first place.





Secure Attachment


If you’re in a securely attached relationship, you probably feel confident that most of the time your partner will respond to you in times of distress. You’re able to experience a felt sense of security even when you’re separated from your partner, and when your partner reaches to you for comfort and connection, you’re able to be responsive in a comforting manner. Securely attached individuals and their partners have a deep emotional bond, so while you experience conflict from time to time, you’re able to find repair and resolution. You can set gentle, healthy boundaries when needed.





Insecure-Avoidant Attachment


If you have an avoidant attachment, you’re probably somewhat disconnected from your own emotions and attachment needs, which makes it difficult to understand and respond to your partner’s emotions and attachment needs. You long to know that your partner sees you as successful in the relationship—but you haven’t learned all the ways you can make that longing a reality. Sometimes it might seem that no matter how hard you try, it will never be enough. If you have an avoidant attachment, you might handle relationship stress with disconnection, distraction, counterattacks, defensiveness, and even getting overly rational in order to protect yourself from painful feelings of failure or rejection (which probably isn’t apparent on the surface). These strategies for self-protection can get in the way of your ability to respond to your partner’s distress, and make it harder to form and sustain an emotional bond or engage in healthy conflict. While anyone can have an avoidant attachment, it skews male. Research shows that the majority of avoidant-attached individuals are men—in my clinical experience it breaks down to around 75/25 male/female.





Insecure-Anxious Attachment


If you have an anxious attachment, you probably have difficulty being emotionally or physically separated from your partner, and you likely feel a need to protest when your partner is unresponsive to your distress and bids for connection. You might feel ambivalent about your partner: deeply craving their love and attention, while also experiencing bitterness and sadness over their inability to meet your attachment needs. You might have difficulty seeing how your own relationship behaviors contribute to problems. If you are anxiously attached, you probably attempt to reach your partner with reactive blame, clinging, criticism, and accusations—all because you want to find connection and protect yourself from your fear of abandonment. When you do get the connection you’re looking for, it’s often hard to fully take it in because it can be so hard to trust it will last. While anyone can have an anxious attachment, it skews female. Research shows that the majority of anxiously attached individuals are women—in my clinical experience it breaks down to around 75/25 female/male.





Disorganized Attachment


Even those somewhat familiar with attachment theory may not know about the fourth type, disorganized attachment. The dark horse of attachment styles, disorganized attachment is less common and less easily understood. When compared to those in the secure, anxious, and avoidant categories of attachment, those with disorganized attachment experience more emotional turmoil, fewer coping strategies, and less ability to trust themselves and others. They go to greater (and often more unpredictable) behavioral lengths to manage their attachment distress, including “going blank” or even becoming abusive (although certainly not everyone with a disorganized attachment is abusive). Disorganized attachment is also highly associated with childhood trauma. Many people assume disorganized attachment is a mere combination of anxious and avoidant, but this is not the case. While it’s true that someone with a disorganized attachment might be high in both anxiousness and avoidance, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.

If you have a disorganized attachment you may experience intense emotions and unstable moods and engage in contradictory behaviors that swing between seeking closeness and disengagement. You might experience feelings that alternate between hostility and helplessness, and have extreme fears of rejection. If this is you, you’ve probably taken drastic measures to avoid pain and seek reconnection with a partner during separations. What do I mean? When someone with a mild anxious attachment experiences an abandonment fear, they might text their partner several times until they get a response. When their partner finally responds, they feel a mixture of relief and anger, but they can more or less cope without becoming dysregulated and/or destructive. If you have a disorganized attachment, this might be even more intense—you might call, text, drive to your partner’s work, and maybe cause a scene. On the other hand, you might experience moments, or even stretches of time, of being able to turn off your feelings or go numb.

No matter what attachment style you fall into (and you’ll have a better sense of that in the next chapter), it’s important to know that you’re not alone. You are not broken if you have an insecure attachment—in fact, it’s incredibly common. It doesn’t mean you necessarily had a bad childhood or that your parents didn’t love you or that you won’t be able to experience healthy, fulfilling, and loving relationships. You absolutely can, and that’s why we’re here. In my experience, it’s very hard for couples to find a secure attachment without any effort or awareness of the relationship tools we’ll discuss in this book. The reason my social media account grew as it did is that hundreds of thousands of people with insecure attachments could see themselves in these definitions and wanted to work on themselves and their relationships. The reason we dig into attachment styles isn’t to slap a label on you—it’s to create a deep understanding that will ultimately help you get healthier and move toward the connected partnership you know is possible. Once you identify your own style, you can use that knowledge to guide you to improve, and secure, your connection.





CHAPTER 3 Identifying Your Attachment Style





Let’s understand you: by identifying your own attachment style, you can begin to understand why you show up in relationships the way you do, which in turn will help you make the changes necessary to communicate better, one interaction at a time, and find the secure relationship you’re looking for.

While understanding is necessary for change, remember that seeing clearly can be really uncomfortable. As you witness your own patterns emerge, it can bring up a lot of old feelings that you’ve kept buried for a long time. This is totally normal. As you read through this chapter, please know that this is not the time to be hard on yourself. Instead, it’s the time for compassion for yourself and your loved ones. We all come by our attachment styles honestly. No one is born with an attachment style; they are created in the context of relationships. Just like you learned where the toothpaste was in the bathroom (hopefully), you learned how to respond emotionally to the adults in your life, and those became patterns that are still with you as an adult. But today you can choose to understand and move beyond these protective stances—they may have helped you then, but they are likely hurting you (and your partner) now. So your attachment style, whatever it is, is not a value judgment. We investigate our attachment styles not to see how “good” we are at relationships, but because they are at the root of much of our relationship conflict. Understanding where you fall can help you to begin to grow and heal.

Finally, your unique experience with your partner matters more than a label. Although attachment labels will help you get greater insight into yourself and your relationship experiences, you don’t need to fit perfectly into an attachment category to improve your relationship. And even if you do fit perfectly into one category, remember that no two insecure attachments are alike. Attachment styles exist on a spectrum. Someone with an avoidant attachment can be more avoidant than another person with an avoidant attachment. Same with anxious attachment. One person might have an anxious attachment that is closer to the disorganized end of the spectrum, while another person’s anxious attachment is closer to the secure end. But both people need to move in the same direction by doing the same work. This is key. Attachment styles are not set in stone; an individual can move from any point on the spectrum toward a secure attachment. Also, the premise of Secure Love rests on the idea that you need not have grown up with a secure attachment to experience one now. When adults work on themselves to develop the skills and traits of those who had secure childhoods, it’s called an earned secure attachment.

Consider the following chart to help you visually understand the progression along the spectrum from the most extreme version of insecure attachment (disorganized) to secure attachment.



Notice how the arrows begin to shift as the spectrum moves into secure. This is because when a partner’s attachment style begins to shift into secure, their behaviors often become more flexible. As an individual becomes more secure, they get better at accessing more parts of themselves. The avoidant partner can access their feelings and become more emotionally engaged. At first, their expression might not be entirely finessed, but with practice they get there. The anxious partner, on the other hand, becomes less overwhelmed and reactive and might start to disengage more than they used to. Disorganized partners develop better coping mechanisms in the face of relationship stress and build trust. Gradually both partners, as they continue to work, find balance.

The icing on the cake is that when partners find security with each other, they begin to see improvement in relationships outside of their romantic partnership—with children, extended family, coworkers, and friends. Why? For one, we all carry attachment “blueprints” within us. Even in casual relationships that don’t have the level of attachment bond necessary for a true attachment style to come alive (or don’t yet, such as in early dating), those attachment blueprints will impact our interactions. You might not have an attachment bond with your employer, but he might remind you of your controlling mother, and so you might react to him in a similar manner. Secure attachment is about learning to truly connect, so it only makes sense that when you learn how to connect with your partner, you’ll learn how to connect with the other people in your life (in ways that are appropriate to the depth and role of the relationship).





Attachment in Childhood


Your attachment style was established when you were just a child. Attachment styles can shift throughout adulthood, but most people retain the style they developed during childhood. As you read about each style, you might recognize your own childhood in the descriptions—this can help you identify your attachment style and understand why you might feel the way you do. It might hit a nerve! Reliving childhood wounds can be sensitive work, so as you read, I want you to have empathy for the child you once were. I also want you to remember, again, that having an insecure attachment style doesn’t mean you were raised with unloving or abusive parents. Most of you with insecure attachment styles were raised by parents who loved you and did the best they could. You may have had an idyllic childhood on paper, and that might be how you remember it. An insecure attachment simply means that your parents weren’t able to provide you with the emotional support skills you needed enough of the time. They couldn’t give you what they didn’t have. This work isn’t about casting blame; it’s about understanding how your past is impacting your present, in the service of finding solutions.

Once you understand how or why your childhood informed your attachment, we’ll discuss how these styles are manifesting in your adult relationships, because childhood wounds almost always carry over into our adult experiences.

Let’s start by looking at the three attachment styles that are most likely to cause the relationship problems discussed in this book, and conclude with a look at the ultimate goal for all of us: secure attachment. (If you’re interested in learning more about your childhood experiences with attachment, or how your attachment style can show up in your relationship, I’ve included charts for each attachment style in the appendix.)





Anxious Attachment


The Anxious-Attached Child


My former client Nora remembers fighting with her younger sister a lot, like all kids do, but she also remembers always having to take the blame. Her parents didn’t allow her to talk through her anger, or to be heard for how unfairly she felt she was treated and get comfort for how hard these feelings were for her. She didn’t receive help to work out her feelings or learn healthy boundaries—instead she was simply told to stop misbehaving and stop picking on her sister. Nora was on her own trying to figure out how to manage her emotions, and because she was ignored when she felt bad, she deduced that “if I have this ‘bad’ experience like anger, I’m flawed.” From there came a logical (if usually subconscious) question: “If my feelings make me flawed and bad, am I even lovable like other kids are lovable?”

Sometimes Nora’s parents were able to be there for her, and this is the crux of anxious attachment: they get enough responsiveness to know what it feels like, but not enough to trust it will last. For anxiously attached children like Nora, relationship anxiety is a result of not consistently getting attachment needs met. (Anyone with any attachment style can have anxiety in other areas of life, but anxious attachment is specifically about relationship anxiety.) Think of the term food insecurity: people with food insecurity aren’t starving, but they never really know if they will be in the future. If you were an anxiously attached child, you got enough of the emotional “food” to know it existed, but not enough to relax into the knowledge that it would be there when you were hurting inside and when you just needed to be seen and connect. Instead of your emotional energy being used for your own healthy development, you were busy wondering, “Will you be there for me now? What about now? Are you going to be there for me next time? What about the time after that?” Sounds exhausting, doesn’t it?

Fighting for reassurance and validation were Nora’s ways of feeling lovable and getting reassurance that her needs mattered. All children are driven to feel lovable. Without even realizing it, they will put everything else to the side to get this need met. If you had to fight to get your emotions validated, you probably found yourself wondering, although maybe not consciously, what it meant about you that you couldn’t rely on support and what it meant about those you depended on, that they couldn’t always show up for you when you needed them. Could anyone be trusted to be consistently there for you? All of this leads to the core fear of the anxiously attached child: a fear of emotional or physical abandonment. The word abandonment might sound dramatic, but when we consider that the attachment system exists to ensure our very survival, it’s not inaccurate.

Anxious children are also ambivalent about their feelings. On one hand, they don’t trust that their feelings are valid or acceptable, but on the other hand, they’re still driven to express them. This gets them caught in a cycle of big expressions, being responded to negatively, and then feeling badly about themselves for failing to hold back. This tension between wanting to be seen but also believing they’ll be rejected if they try contributes to enormous anxiety.

If you have an anxious attachment, your feelings and perspectives likely weren’t consistently validated. In fact, maybe they weren’t ever validated. Do you remember being told as a child that your feelings made sense and were reasonable, even in times when the way you behaved in response to your feelings wasn’t appropriate? If the answer is no, you’re not alone. Some of the anxious clients I treat remember getting emotional validation here and there, but many don’t remember any at all.

You might be wondering why your parents couldn’t consistently be there for you in the way you needed. Maybe your parents were under high levels of stress, lacked parenting skills, had to work long hours to keep food on the table, were dealing with chronic physical or mental illness, had a lack of support for other children or one with special needs, struggled with unresolved childhood traumas or wounds, had to provide care to elderly or sick parents or a spouse, or more. Often they don’t know how to meet their own emotional needs so doing so for another person, even a child, is challenging.

So how did you get your needs met? If you were an anxiously attached child, you probably had to learn to make yourself as big and noticeable as possible to have your feelings responded to. You may have acted out with tantrums and behaviors that demanded attention, or you may have tested your parents’ availability to ensure they’d be there in the future. In a similar vein, some anxiously attached children will become people-pleasers in their quest for reassurance. If you can relate, you drew your value and your sense of safety by keeping those around you happy. Both of these strategies are designed to help the anxious child feel seen, valued, and responded to positively.

Anxious children often have mixed feelings toward their caregivers. They crave love and care and feel driven to seek it out; but they’re also resentful about all the times they felt dropped. This tension can feel unbearable and anxiety-provoking… wanting to reach in a way that will be successful, but also wanting their hurt to be known.





The Anxious-Attached Adult


I often say that while the hardest thing about working with avoidant partners is getting them through the door, the hardest thing about working with anxious partners is getting them to see their part of the problem. Most of the anxious-attached partners I treat show up to couples therapy because they’re certain their partner is the problem, and they need me to fix them. Their search for love tends to be out of balance: a self-focused hunger for love at the expense of an authentic desire to be a sensitive and responsive partner. When we view these individuals through the attachment lens, it makes sense: anxious partners were wired during childhood to be “other-focused.” Given the way attachment patterns in their lives have played out, they have good reason to feel let down by others. But that doesn’t mean they don’t play an equal part in their relationship struggles, a truth they often can’t see because of how great their pain is.

Am I saying that partners with anxious attachments are all unreasonable and blind to their own faults? Not at all. Many anxious-attached partners can recognize their relationship faults. They often work on themselves incessantly. They go to personal therapy, they read books, they try their best to follow all the relationship advice they can get their hands on. And when they look up from all their self-work and see their partner doing nothing—no therapy, no relationship books, what they perceive as no attempt at self-growth—they come to the understandable and painful conclusion that “I care; they don’t.” We’ll talk later about why that’s usually not the case, but if you have an anxious attachment, the chances are high you can relate.

Also consider that what the anxious partner considers relationship work isn’t always effective work. I call this “watering the plant with gasoline.” For example, an anxious partner gets a relationship book and learns about healthier communication. They read that partners should share authentically with each other. So when their partner would rather, say, watch football on a Sunday than clean the garage, they “authentically” say “you aren’t responding to my needs and that makes me sad.” They are “working on the relationship,” yes, but are they considering their partner’s needs, too? If not, they aren’t really watering the plant.

Let’s go back to this term other-focused. If you have an anxious attachment, too much of your sense of self is put into the hands of others—in this case, your partner. You give your partner’s experience and behavior significant control over your experience in the world. Say you’re out with friends and you text your partner and don’t hear back. The meaning you make is they aren’t thinking about you. Your anxiety elevates to a level that takes away your presence with your friends. Later, instead of taking some time to feel your feelings about your partner’s actions and then sharing your fears with them, maybe asking about their experience and for reassurance, and making a plan for next time, you demand they text you back within a certain time frame because “that’s what people who care about their partners do.” You’re not trying to be controlling—only in the rarest of circumstances do I think any partner is coming from a place of consciously wanting to control their partner’s every move—but in your mind, you need for them to know how much this hurts so they’ll change and you’ll feel safe. This is considered an “other-focused” approach because you’ve led with “what you need to do differently so I can feel okay,” instead of going inward and saying, “Hmmm… what’s going on with me right now? What is this all about? What am I needing from myself right now? What am I needing from my partner?” and then “What does my partner need from me?”

When your security is reliant on the words and behaviors of your partner to the degree it is with anxious-attached partners, there will be anxiety. Why? Because nobody ultimately has control over their partners. To think otherwise is to give away one’s sense of power. Powerlessness creates anxiety.

Remember, none of this makes you bad, broken, or a lost cause. You are whole. Your attachment experiences as a child didn’t provide you with the space you needed to develop a healthy, interdependent sense of self. When you experienced a normal feeling like jealousy, maybe you were told that you were “too sensitive” or bad for experiencing an “unacceptable” feeling. In moments when you were needy or angry, you got the message “these feelings are too much, we don’t have time for this.” Your sense of self manifested as “you define me; your experience defines mine.” You became less concerned with “I feel lonely; I feel angry; I feel proud,” and more in touch with “you think I shouldn’t be lonely, you think my anger is shameful, you decide what I should be proud of,” and “if you think I’m too much for having these feelings, I must be too much.” Essentially you learned to become disconnected from your own experiences. Your ambivalent mindset—needing others to define whether you are “good” or “bad,” “lovable” or “unlovable,” in any given moment, but then feeling angry at them for (what you perceive as) having so much power—fuels your relationship expectations and interactions. It also fuels fear-based communication, and you get stuck expending an exhausting amount of energy ensuring your partner will show up in the way that you think will make you feel the least anxious, but in ways that in fact harm the connection you so desperately crave, leaving you feeling even more anxious.

In my practice, I see many consistencies among the anxious partners I treat. If you have an anxious attachment, you’ll probably relate to any or all of the following: being highly sensitive to any real or perceived threat to relationship safety, or to invalidation; filtering for the negative; having difficulty self-regulating; and feeling a constant need for reassurance at the expense of two-way connection.

“Filtering for the negative” is particularly common among those with anxious attachments. Your sensitivity to anything that might feel threatening to your relationship safety leaves you prone to seeing your relationship through a negative lens, because you have a hard time trusting that emotional support will be consistently available. You probably believe that if you can notice what’s wrong now, you can fix it before it’s too late. As a result, your partner might do ten things in a given day to show love and care, but due to your need to filter for the negative, a response from them that might be even a little off (intentionally or not) can cause fear to rise up inside you, causing you to go to the extreme: “see, proof that they don’t really love me.” Quickly, your fear can shift into frustration or anger, and these feelings are going to heavily inform the way you communicate. It’s going to make the difference between vulnerable and protective, effective and ineffective.

Your anxious attachment is also going to leave you struggling to feel lovable and constantly pulling for reassurance that your partner will show up for you when you really need them. Your difficulty feeling the love that does come your way leaves you feeling chronically dissatisfied with the amount and quality of care you receive from your partner. Those with an anxious attachment often have difficulty trusting that anything good that comes their way will stick around, which may lead you to subconsciously push away the very closeness you pull for. You may end up in long and wordy discussions about relationship problems, peppering your partner with questions (asking the same questions repeatedly, yet not believing the answers), and testing behaviors, which are usually set up subconsciously, in your quest to feel reassured (the idea being “if you can just pass this one last test, then I can finally feel safe”).

As an anxious partner, you have a desperate need for love and reassurance, and it can be difficult for you to self-regulate the pain of your unsatisfied longing. Without a source of relief, you might show intense displays of emotion, especially if you’re on the more distressed end of the anxious spectrum, which can sometimes overwhelm both you and your partner. You almost certainly have difficulty ending or taking breaks from arguments because fighting often feels better than being alone with your emotional pain.

Just like anxious children, anxious partners are especially sensitive to invalidation, so if your partner responds to you with something along the lines of “you’re overreacting,” it’s going to feel like a punch in the stomach. Nobody wants to hear they’re overreacting when they want to be heard, but for you it’s a double whammy: the invalidation in the present feels awful and it touches a very old, very sensitive wound. You might notice feelings of invalidation as a common entry point into a negative cycle.

If you recognize yourself in this description, don’t be hard on yourself. All of what you’re doing is for good reason—you’re hoping beyond hope that if you can just get it right, if you can just convince your partner to hear you, you’ll find the closeness and feelings of safety you may have been yearning for for a lifetime, and you just haven’t yet learned another way to get them.

It’s also important to not take what I’m describing out of the context of your specific relationship. The majority of partners with an insecure attachment have partners who also have an insecure attachment—together their behaviors reinforce each other’s insecurity, and sometimes even worsen it. If you’re reading this and thinking, “Of course I’m going to demand to be heard, otherwise my partner won’t pay attention to me,” let me say this: I believe you. I believe that your partner does and says plenty of things that leave you feeling invalidated, frustrated, and alone. Attachment styles in relationships don’t exist in a vacuum. My intention isn’t to shame or invalidate your behavior but rather to shine a light on it so we can make sense of it, and ultimately provide you with a better option, one that will increase the odds you’ll be heard without having to exhaust yourself.


Do I Have an Anxious Attachment?

1. In your romantic relationship, do you fear abandonment, either all the time or mostly in moments when your attachment safety feels threatened?

2. Do you crave more together time and closeness than your partner seems to?

3. Are you more likely to bring up relationship concerns than your partner?

4. Do you think if your partner would just get it right (in the way you define “right”) you wouldn’t have to protest, get emotionally big, critical, and/or overly demanding?

5. Are you especially triggered when you don’t feel emotionally validated or emotionally supported?

6. Do you feel the urge to have things resolved right then and there?

7. Do you find yourself wanting to continue arguments until you find the sense of safety you’re looking for?

8. Do you frequently fall into any of the following patterns during arguments: often being the one bringing up concerns (especially pertaining to the relationship), protesting, criticizing, feeling emotionally escalated, crying or feeling rage, seething (maybe with fantasies of leaving them), wanting to make up?





Avoidant Attachment


The Avoidant-Attached Child


My client Jake tells me his parents did an excellent job of caring for his physical, social, and educational needs. He always had the clothes he needed, a stable environment, help with his homework, and he remembers feeling loved. It isn’t until we start to dig into why adult Jake is struggling so much in his relationship that he can see a clearer picture. Yes, Jake was well taken care of when it came to his basic needs, which was no small thing, but since he didn’t get emotional support from his parents, he tried to push away his need for that support. If Jake felt sad, for example, he would find ways to make the sadness “go away” (usually by pushing it out of awareness and finding ways to distract himself) so he didn’t have to deal with two layers of distress: the sadness and the painful reality that nobody was around to help him. Eventually Jake, like all avoidant children, told himself (albeit subconsciously) that his bad feelings didn’t matter so he might as well just get over them. Jake learned to deactivate his attachment needs.

Jake’s memory of his childhood is common. Children with avoidant attachment often don’t consciously experience stressful childhoods. The avoidant partners I treat often describe their childhoods as normal, sometimes even “perfect.” They don’t really understand why other people complain so much about their parents. “Sure,” they say, “my parents were hard on me at times, but I deserved it.” Many avoidant partners don’t remember feeling anxious or suffering neglect or abuse. It’s not uncommon to learn as the therapy progresses that some of this actually did go on. Long-term memories are only stored in the brain when there’s a strong emotional component, so children who can push their emotions out of awareness might have fewer conscious memories of stressful events. It also stands to reason they don’t experience their childhoods as emotionally deprived because they didn’t know what they were missing.

Some children learn to become avoidant because at least one parent is emotionally intrusive. In those instances, children have little privacy or are forced or coerced into sharing thoughts and feelings they don’t want to share. Emotionally intrusive caregivers don’t know how to connect, otherwise they wouldn’t need to be intrusive, so kids with this type of parenting end up feeling icky about the topic of “talking about feelings” and left without a source of emotional comfort and connection. Another version of this is when children do share what they’re feeling and their feelings cause their parents to get anxious, frantic, or overwhelmed. Remember, children need to feel safe, and they don’t feel safe if they believe the people they rely on for care aren’t themselves safe.

If you were an avoidant-attached child, you had to learn early in life to give up on expressing your emotional needs or distress, and push your attachment longings and emotional needs out of conscious awareness. You might even be reading this right now saying, “I can’t relate to this. I never stuffed down my feelings… I just never had them.” Without access to your feelings, your brain learned to default to logic, reason, and a problem-solving approach to life that comes at the expense of a rich emotional self (along with difficulty connecting with the emotional selves of others). You became emotionally disengaged.

As with the other insecure attachment styles, if you are avoidantly attached, anger wasn’t managed well in your family. Maybe you saw family members get big, scary, or off-putting when they were mad, and you came to believe that anger the emotion is the same as escalated, angry behaviors. Maybe only certain family members showed anger and others pretended it didn’t exist and you said to yourself, “I don’t want to be the angry one.” Maybe you never saw anger expressed at all. Maybe what looked like stability was really a power imbalance, where one parent makes most of the decisions, and the other one goes along with it to avoid conflict. Whatever your experience with anger, one thing you didn’t see is two people get mad at each other, work through it, and repair, and you learned to view anger, and the expression of anger, as a shameful experience. While anxious-attached children also feel shame around their anger, they continue to show it. Why? Because for them it’s better to fight to be responded to than to be ignored. Avoidant children, on the other hand, would rather avoid the shame they associate with anger by keeping it in.

People often ask me if it’s “better” to have an avoidant attachment, so you don’t have to feel the pain. I understand the logic. But the truth is that while children with avoidant attachments might not directly feel their attachment-related pain, they experience it in other ways, even if it only shows up as a sense of emptiness. Stuffing feelings out of awareness doesn’t mean they go away. In fact, when the original study that labeled attachment styles was conducted on children experiencing attachment stress, it was the avoidant-attached children who showed the least external signs of stress, but who also carried the most signs of stress in their bodies, like elevated blood pressure and heart rate. If you grew up with an avoidant attachment, you had much more going on inside you than you realized then, and probably more than you realize now.

Since avoidantly attached children lack real emotional connection, they are deprived of the assurance that their innermost emotional self is acceptable just as it is. As a result, they work overtime for approval in other areas and are often high achievers. Though in some cases, these children feel as if they’re incapable of finding outside approval, develop a fear of failure, and become underachievers. When avoidant children have trouble achieving in the ways that their parents or caregivers value, they might escape their feelings of failure with things like food, hobbies, video games, or even substance abuse.





The Avoidant-Attached Adult


Pete showed up to couples therapy the way many of the avoidant-attached partners I treat do: skeptical. Skeptical of me, skeptical of therapy, and skeptical of the idea that anything can ever be changed by “talking about feelings.” His skepticism made sense, given that partners with avoidant attachment approach relationship problems in the same way they approach their non-relationship life: with an overemphasis on logic and reason and an underemphasis on anything emotional. This approach can often result in career success, and it can help avoidant-attached partners get by in relationships to some degree. Oftentimes their ability to suppress emotions can defuse situations that would otherwise escalate. But there is a cost. In Pete’s mind, the solution to his relationship problems was simple: his partner, Freya, needed to stop being so emotional. If only she could see reason, they wouldn’t fight so much. Pete told me, “I do everything I can to be a good partner. I’m loyal and a hard worker. I see these men at work who are all cheating on their wives. I’d never do that to Freya. But she always finds something to complain about and there’s only so much that I can ‘talk about talking.’ ” (This was how Pete described Freya’s need to talk about the communication problems in their relationship.)

Was Pete stubborn and resistant to change? No, Pete was not broken relationship goods. In fact, he ended up being very successful in therapy. Together we learned that Pete needed to minimize Freya’s emotional needs because that’s how he had made it through life. Detaching from his own emotions that might threaten or overwhelm him, especially during stressful moments, was how Pete felt safe in the world, and he did this without even being consciously aware of it. Freya was initially attracted to Pete’s stability and success, which she hadn’t experienced much of in her upbringing. In Pete’s subconscious mind, if he were to switch gears and start playing a new game he didn’t know the rules to, he wouldn’t be able to keep up and he’d end up failing himself and Freya. By clinging to the belief that Freya needed to stop being so emotional, Pete was saying, “I don’t understand the emotional part of myself and I don’t understand how to help Freya with hers, so instead of facing the limitations I’m afraid to see in myself, it’s easier to tell myself that Freya’s feelings are the problem.” Pete wanted a good relationship just as much as Freya did; he just had a very different way of trying to get there.

Another reason those with avoidant attachments can be averse to going to therapy is their belief that they’re supposed to figure everything out on their own and have all the answers, especially when it comes to relationships, which in their minds should be so easy. When problems arise, they blame themselves for not getting it right, and nothing says “not getting it right” in a relationship like a fight. If you can relate to wanting to avoid conflict because of the threat it poses to the relationship or to your view of yourself, or because you find it an exhausting waste of time, you might deflect your partner’s relationship concerns by saying things like “I don’t want to talk about it right now, I just got home.” If things get hot anyway, you might tell your partner they’re overreacting or getting their facts mixed up. You might get overly defensive, try to stay calm and rational, or you might just say what they want to hear to turn down the heat as quickly as possible.

The “stereotypical” avoidant partner is reserved, shut down, conflict-averse, and connection-averse, but many of you reading this might not be able to relate to that picture. In my experience with real couples, it’s not always so cut and dried. Your avoidant attachment might hide behind behaviors that seek connection and resolution in some areas of the relationship (such as pursuing sex), behind romantic words and gestures (especially early in the relationship before negative cycles have set in), behind boisterous personality types, and behind escalated behaviors during conflict.

So what makes an avoidant an avoidant? In my practice I see three commonalities among those with avoidant attachment: a fear of failing, a disconnection from feelings (emotional disengagement), and a fear of being engulfed.

If you fail in your relationship, you’ll have to deal with the intense shame of letting yourself down because you’ve let down your partner, or you’ve let down others who you fear may judge you for not being able to make it work. Sometimes this fear of failure shows up in what you do—deflect or defend so you don’t have to be the bad guy—or in what you don’t do—shutting down, finding ways to distract yourself, or telling your partner what they want to hear, at the expense of being authentic, to keep things from getting worse. While your anxious partner is trying to close the distance in the relationship so they don’t feel alone, you try to keep things from getting worse so you don’t have to feel the shame of failure.

Avoidant partners often get accused of not wanting emotional connection. I couldn’t disagree more. What I’ve learned to be true is that those with avoidant attachments have simply lost contact with their feelings and with their emotional needs, including the need for emotional closeness. On top of this, they’ve never had good experiences with connection or intimacy. They’ve learned to associate them with weakness and dependency, or with expectations they can’t possibly live up to, and of course they don’t want to feel weak, dependent, and like a failure. My job as a therapist isn’t to help avoidant partners start wanting intimacy and connection; my job is to help them clear up their misconceptions of intimacy and uncover the blocks to their desire for connection that already exists. It’s not that avoidant partners don’t want to connect, it’s that they don’t know what it means, and even if they did, they don’t know how.

Anger is probably a particularly complicated emotion for you if you have an avoidant attachment. Many of the clients I treat with avoidant attachment can’t admit they’re mad, either because they can’t recognize their own anger or because they’ve been conditioned to think anger is a shameful or dangerous emotion. They have bad moods they can’t see, but which everyone around them can feel. If you have an avoidant attachment, you might act out anger by shutting down, using mean humor, being passive-aggressive, retreating, or becoming overly frustrated by little things often unrelated to the relationship (a broken faucet, for example, might cause an emotional outburst).

Some of you with avoidant attachments might be thinking, “But I don’t always shut down; sometimes I fight.” It’s not uncommon for avoidant partners to get escalated during conflict, especially when your other strategies to avoid conflict fall flat and you get pushed to your edge. If this is you, you might recognize the following pattern: Your partner makes a complaint about wanting more time together. First you defend yourself and say you spend plenty of time together and list out all the times you’ve spent together in the last week. That doesn’t convince them, so you accuse your partner of never being satisfied. That doesn’t work so you stop talking altogether and say something vague like “fine, if you want to spend more time together, we’ll spend more time together.” Your partner doesn’t buy it and the invalidation leaves them angry and coming at you hot and with tears. You feel enraged that what was a perfectly fine afternoon is now a fight and so finally return fire with fire. Afterward, you beat yourself up for letting yourself get mad and vow to “never do that again.” Unfortunately, since you haven’t yet learned another way, the pattern repeats itself.

If you’re avoidant attached, you might find your partner’s attempts at emotional reaches stifling and uncomfortable and want to push them away. Somewhere deep inside you, you long for the felt experience of closeness, but when you get it, even if it feels good, a part of you associates it with weakness and dependency, which is, for lack of a better term, a buzzkill. You might associate closeness with a complete loss of self. Instead of facing your own fears, it can be easier to assume that your partner’s needs are the problem. You might ask yourself, why do they have to be so needy? When you step back, you know this behavior leaves your partner feeling confused and alone, but in the moment your fears take over.

My client Gigi was raised by a single mother who was repeatedly let down by the men in her life. Gigi remembers her mother insisting how important it was for her to grow up to be a strong woman who didn’t become reliant on men. This was her mother’s way of protecting Gigi from her own painful experiences and Gigi got the message that even healthy emotional interdependence with a partner would violate the sense of independence that kept her safe.

When Gigi fell in love with Colin, they ran into problems when Colin had reasonable expectations of emotional connectedness between the two of them. Even on their wedding day, Gigi was reluctant to hold hands with Colin in front of others out of fear that she might be seen as a weak, dependent woman. When Colin talked about feelings or asked Gigi for emotional support, she became annoyed and accused him of being too needy. Naturally this left Colin feeling invalidated and alone and their relationship suffered.

Was Gigi broken and biologically wired to push away closeness? No, she came by her fears honestly, just like you did. And when Gigi was better able to understand herself, connect with her inner world, and use what she found to cultivate true connections, her relationship with Colin (who had his own work to do too) was able to find secure attachment.


Do I Have an Avoidant Attachment?

1. In your romantic relationship, do you fear being seen as a failure by your partner (or a failure at the relationship) more than you fear being emotionally or physically abandoned?

2. Does your partner seem to need more together time and closeness than you?

3. Does too much closeness sometimes feel uncomfortable?

4. Do you tend to avoid bringing up relationship concerns because you either don’t have them, or you don’t want to talk about them, or you fear it will trigger your partner if you bring them up?

5. Do you often feel unappreciated or as if you’re never getting it right for your partner?

6. Do you hold in your relationship anger and try to make the best of things, only to lose your temper later, or in areas unrelated to the relationship?

7. Do you find yourself wanting to be the first to shut down arguments?

8. Do you frequently fall into any of the following patterns during arguments: defending, counter-blaming, appeasing, shutting down?





Disorganized Attachment


The Disorganized-Attached Child


Children in the anxious, avoidant, and secure attachment categories have consistent strategies to get their needs met. Anxious children cry for attention with protest, people-pleasing, or anything that might help them feel seen, valid, and lovable; avoidant children evade disappointment by disconnecting from their needs, and secure children ask and receive (more on this shortly). Due to the consistency of these strategies, the original attachment researchers considered these three groups to be “organized.” But there’s a fourth category of children who don’t fit into any of these descriptions. These children are generally overwhelmed with their inner experiences and have enormous inner conflict. When triggered, their behaviors lack predictability, and as such, researchers have labeled them “disorganized.”

If you were a disorganized-attached child, you never felt completely safe. You might relate to feelings of fear and mistrust of your parents or caregivers. The people you needed most may have also been a source of danger. Maybe they were overly punitive, outright abusive, or extremely neglectful. Maybe this wasn’t the case all the time, but enough of the time to have an impact. If so, it put you in a position of living with a painful inner conflict: an intense, biological drive for emotional comfort and safety, but with no hope of finding it. This is called approach/fear distress: “I need to approach, but I’m too afraid,” and the deep sense of despair that accompanies such conflict.

All this inner turmoil would have left you in a state in which your nervous system was activated a lot of the time. You had significantly more difficulty managing intense emotions, which then fueled intense, exaggerated, and often unpredictable behaviors. Your nervous system may have had to learn to dissociate (a sense of leaving your own body) to survive traumatic experiences. Or you may have learned to stuff your emotions so far out of awareness that they practically ceased to exist.

While a disorganized attachment is often associated with trauma and abuse, this isn’t always the case. Research has shown that the one thing parents of those with disorganized attachment are found to have in common is unresolved trauma and unresolved grief from their own pasts.





The Disorganized-Attached Adult


If you have a disorganized attachment, your childhood was highly dysfunctional (even if it wasn’t obvious on the surface or to outsiders), leaving you with few inner resources to thrive in relationships. You’re going to experience higher amounts of attachment distress, your distress will be triggered more easily, and your behaviors to manage all the relationship pain you carry around will be, understandably, more extreme. As I mentioned in the previous chapter, many people erroneously believe disorganized attachment is a mere combination of anxious and avoidant, but this is not the case. While it’s true that someone with a disorganized attachment might be high in both anxiousness and avoidance, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.

Most people with disorganized attachment will relate to the experience of an anxious attachment but with more intensity and less predictability. According to research, this type of disorganized attachment is called disorganized-oscillating.

Those with disorganized-oscillating and anxious attachment styles share a fear of abandonment and rejection, the need to keep partners physically close, frequent dissatisfaction in relationships, and behaviors such as protests and making demands. At the same time, you might find that soon after you pull your partner in, you have the urge to push them away, as if to say, “I need you, but I know you’re going to abandon me so I’m going to abandon you before you abandon me. But wait, I need you. Come back.” If you find that your current or past relationships are especially tumultuous—fights that might escalate to extreme verbal abuse or violence, impulsive breakups and getting back together, and what we might call high drama—disorganized attachment might be at play.

To say that having a disorganized attachment is a painful way to live is an understatement. If you can relate, your struggle doesn’t come from nowhere and you’re not broken. You were raised in an environment that left you unable to trust others or yourself. Being able to trust that people exist who can be there for you is required for relationship safety, and safety is required for closeness. Not being able to trust leaves you feeling disconnected and alone, even when you’re not physically alone. For many, an ongoing experience of true intimacy and relationship safety might seem like a foreign concept. When the pain is most unbearable, you might take desperate measures to feel better: “text-bombing” your partner, demanding that they engage with you, or overreacting when you think they’ve been disloyal in any way. Or you might go to the opposite extreme and suddenly “drop” a partner out of the blue, providing them with little or no explanation (especially early into a relationship). The level of escalation can vary from individual to individual, but there is always a flavor of being lost in powerful emotions. And for good reason—in these states of high dysregulation, your alarmed nervous system is driving the car, not the real you.

Those with a disorganized-oscillating attachment will likely relate to going back and forth between moments of intensity and moments of shutting down entirely. This is because if the experience of disorganized attachment is punctuated by anything, it’s unpredictability. You have unpredictable thoughts, behaviors, and feelings. What triggers you one day might not bother you the next. You might notice mood swings, even multiple swings throughout the day (not the same as bipolar disorder, where swings are spread over several days or weeks). You might have fits of rage followed by feelings of helpless vulnerability and then back to rage.

I’m not saying this is your experience in the whole of your life. In certain situations where you feel safe and less likely to be triggered, you might feel okay. Some people with a disorganized attachment in their relationships function very well at work or in friendships. But when you do feel unsafe and triggered, you feel it so powerfully that sometimes staying in control during the pain feels like an insurmountable challenge. You have a hard time with healthy boundaries: setting and maintaining your own, as well as respecting those of others. You might relate to experiencing others’ boundaries as punitive, and be afraid that if you set your own, you’ll get abandoned. If you have disorganized attachment and have experienced trauma, which very often go together, you might disassociate (a feeling of leaving one’s body) when things get especially intense. It can be easy to confuse dissociation with the typically avoidant behavior of retreating or shutting down, but dissociation is a trauma response, not an avoidant one.

While less common, especially among those seeking relationship help, there’s a second subcategory of disorganized attachment that was observed by researchers who conducted the original studies of disorganized attachment. Marked not by high intensity of emotion but by the extreme opposite, the “disorganized-impoverished” category is defined by an absence of emotional expression, or flatness, and is considered to be on the far end of the avoidant spectrum.

The similarities between the disorganized-impoverished attachment and the avoidant attachment are being cut off from emotions and attachment longings, as well as viewing dependency in self or others as weak, but more extreme. If you can relate to this style, you might recognize your need to keep your life safe and small, with measures like keeping a job that is below your qualifications and avoiding novel experiences such as traveling. Deeply buried within you are feelings of inner chaos similar to those with the more common type of disorganized attachment, but further away from awareness. To avoid getting in touch with this place, you work hard to keep a tight lid on it by avoiding stress. You might have rigid belief systems and even avoid relationships altogether.


Do I Have a Disorganized-Oscillating Attachment?

1. Do you find yourself answering “yes” to many of the questions for anxious attachment?

2. Do you experience intense physical and/or emotional abandonment fears in your romantic relationship?

3. Do you struggle with self-regulation when you’re triggered, and often feel completely lost in your emotions?

4. When arguments get intense, do you either fight back hard, fall apart emotionally, or run away?

5. Do you get offended or hurt more easily than others?

6. Does anger usually feel like rage?

7. Are you unsure of how you might react to a difficult situation—sometimes you might react strongly, while other times you might not react at all, even when the triggers are similar?

8. Do you often have mood swings that make your life feel unstable and unpredictable?

9. Can your feelings for your partner shift from positive to negative, and vice versa, in a short amount of time?

10. Do you have a hard time trusting your partner’s love and/or loyalty even when you have plenty of evidence to do so?




Do I Have a Disorganized-Impoverished Attachment?

1. Do you associate relationship sacrifices with weakness and loss of self?

2. Does the idea of self-reflection (exploring your own thoughts, feelings, and motivations) feel foreign to you?

3. Do you lack curiosity about the inner world of others?

4. If you have some awareness of your feelings, are you unable to put words to them?

5. Do you enjoy work or hobbies more than connection with others?

6. Are you worried that if you commit to too much in life, you’ll get overwhelmed and fail?



If you have a disorganized attachment, you can learn many relationship skills from this book. That said, given what you’ve been through in life, it might be harder for you to self-regulate or emotionally engage well enough in tough moments to put new skills into place. If you’re finding this to be true, don’t despair. You might need special help working through any traumas that are interfering. I recommend Somatic Experiencing therapy (traumahealing.org), which can help you better access your emotions and self-regulate them and will put you in a much better position to be successful with this work. I’ll discuss this type of therapy at greater length in chapter 10.





A Note About All Three Insecure Attachment Styles


If you recognize yourself in any of the three previous descriptions, it’s important to remember that having an insecure attachment style isn’t a lifetime sentence, and it doesn’t mean you’re a failure. People with insecure attachment styles struggle in relationships, but find success in other parts of their lives, such as friendships and careers. Sometimes traits of insecure attachment can actually create strengths in other parts of life. For example, a former client of mine, Anika, was a surgeon, a job that required her to push painful emotions away at will. If she didn’t, the consequences could be devastating for her patients. On days when she had a fight with her wife or a rough morning with the kids—those kinds of mornings that can leave many people feeling thrown off kilter—Anika’s avoidant attachment style gave her an uncanny ability to compartmentalize her feelings to get the job done, and she was known for being one of the top surgeons in the country. What was important for Anika to understand was that while this trait was working for her in her career, it was showing up in her relationship in a way that was not working. So we worked on balancing that out, and I hope you will do the same. For Anika, that meant learning to be emotionally regulated enough to do surgery in the morning, and emotionally available with her family that evening.





Secure Attachment


The Securely Attached Child


After reading through all these descriptions of how things go “wrong,” you might be wondering what “right” even looks like. When it comes to attachment theory, “right” is what we call secure attachment. As I’ve mentioned, securely attached children don’t live in perfect environments with perfect caregivers; rather, they live in good-enough environments with good-enough caregivers: they have a felt sense of confidence that they can reach for emotional comfort and connection from their caregivers when they need it, that they are safe from harm and abandonment, and that most of the time they will be responded to with love and care.

In the context of the four Cs of attachment, securely attached children get enough emotional comfort when they’re in distress (comfort); enough time and attention, including emotional (connection); enough help when things go wrong (conflict); and live in a safe environment where each family member felt their needs were respected (cooperation). What is enough? Let’s go back to climate: How much sunshine does a climate need for it to be considered a sunny climate? Do sunny climates have rainy days? Yes, of course they do. Kids can have hard lives—they can experience loss, tragedy, natural disasters, divorce, or other challenges—and still have a secure attachment if they get enough emotional support through the hard stuff.

If you had a secure attachment as a child, you didn’t have to spend your energy fighting to get your needs met or pushing them away, because you had an overall felt sense of safety and security. Instead, your energy was free to be channeled into growth and development. You had space to get to know yourself. Just like all kids, you experienced adversity in the world, but because you had a “secure base” to return home to, you were less negatively impacted.

Imagine that you’re a child and you get shamed by your teacher in front of the class and you’re riding the bus home feeling awful. Now imagine that you don’t want to tell your parents about what happened because you know they’ll just get mad and blame you, or overreact, or they might not have time to listen at all. Maybe you don’t know how they’ll respond because sometimes they can be comforting and other times they’re angry or unavailable. As you imagine this scenario, what happens in your body when you think about being this child? Maybe you notice subtle signs of sadness or anxiety, like a tight feeling in your throat or chest or tension in your muscles.

Now imagine that you know that later that evening at least one parent or caregiver will be there to listen to you and comfort you. It doesn’t take away the pain of the incident, but at least you know you’ll be cared for, that someone will be there to hold you and dry your tears. Perhaps just reading about having a caring presence to come home to feels soothing. You can feel a release of tension in your body or a sense of warmth. This is what I mean when I say that security is felt on a physical level. (Parents of securely attached children do give advice and guidance; they just don’t lead with these things before tending to kids’ hurt feelings.)

Without carrying the heavy baggage of relationship anxiety (experienced as a nagging desire to reestablish connection to others) or expending the energy to stuff it away, secure children are free to devote their attention to the rich experiences life has to offer and to feel safe taking the measured risks in life required to build confidence.

If you had a secure attachment, the kind of responsiveness I’m describing helped you know your emotions mattered, that they made sense, and that emotional support was available. From this you learned to honor your own emotions as a useful guide in life, and to eventually develop your own inner resources for self-regulation. Armed with the confidence of being able to reach for emotional support at times when it was available, and to self-regulate when it was not, you developed inner confidence, which reinforced your sense of security.

I once asked my client Jorge to describe a positive experience he remembers with his parents. As the story goes, Jorge was five years old and learning to ride his bike without training wheels. The first time he was able to stay up for several feet was a moment to celebrate. Jorge remembers his parents telling him they were proud of him, but he also remembers his dad asking, “Hey, buddy, are you proud of yourself right now?” which gave Jorge the opportunity to develop awareness of his own experience. By inspiring Jorge’s self-reflection, his father helped him develop a sense of self. Jorge was able to say to himself, “It feels good when I overcome a challenging obstacle, not just because others are proud, but because I’m proud.” In other situations, Jorge’s parents might have said, “Look at the smile on your face… you’re so happy,” or even “Uh-oh, it’s frustrating when you fall after you’ve been doing so well, isn’t it? Here, let me help you up.” Having his emotions reflected to him helped Jorge better understand and express himself throughout his life.

Securely attached children are given space to experience painful feelings. When Jorge was older and didn’t get a part in the school play, he was devastated. Instead of telling him not to be upset or that “there’s always next year,” his empathic parents validated his feelings by saying something along the lines of “I’m so sorry. Of course you’re devastated, I know this meant a lot to you.” They used an authentic and emotionally engaged tone (which is only possible if the feelings behind the words are real) and if Jorge needed to cry, they held him while he let out the tears. Later when he had vented and grieved his loss, they moved into a problem-solving approach and looked into a community theater program for him to join. But if they hadn’t gone into problem-solving mode, that would have been fine, too. Not every problem can be solved.

If you were a securely attached child, you experienced your caregivers as wise and strong most of the time (no parent is perfect), and rarely, if ever, did you feel overly responsible for your caregivers’ well-being, emotionally or otherwise. Your caregivers took care of you, not the other way around, but they weren’t so protective that they kept you from learning to navigate adversity. Most important, you learned what sensitive and supportive relationships feel like, and what to “feel” for in future relationships.





The Securely Attached Adult


If you have secure attachment as an adult, you know how to reach for emotional connection from your partner, and you know how to respond to your partner’s bids for connection. You know what a relationship with met attachment needs feels like and this is your standard. You can access and express your emotions and you’re comfortable with vulnerability. You don’t fear or push away emotional connection from your partner. You’re direct about your wants and needs, are responsive to the wants and needs of your partner, can tolerate disappointment, and have flexible boundaries.

If you have a secure attachment, you don’t carry around negative beliefs about yourself like “If I make a mistake that means I’m a failure,” or “I’m unlovable as I am; I have to work overtime to be acceptable.” Without being burdened with these shame- and fear-inducing beliefs about yourself, you feel more safe to be vulnerable in your relationship. Being vulnerable is by definition risky, but if you have a secure attachment, it doesn’t feel like a “life-and-death risk,” as is often the case for those who are insecurely attached. Securely attached, you understand that all relationships experience occasional emotional pain, and you’re able to successfully navigate rough patches. You’re less likely to become defensive in the face of criticism, and you can behave according to your own value system even when your partner does not.

If you have a secure attachment, you place high value on your partner’s wants and needs and trust you’ll get the same in return. When you don’t see eye to eye, you work toward understanding and compromise, rather than trying to convince your partner to see it differently. This isn’t to say you give up on the values that are most important to you, or that you don’t influence each other, but control isn’t at play in the way you manage differences. With a secure attachment, your partner is your number one, your person. But you also have friends and family to go to for connection and support because you know one person in life can’t always meet all our needs.

While a secure attachment in your relationship with yourself as an individual and a secure attachment to your partner are closely related, and in fact feed off each other, they are not the same. We’re speaking about two different relationships. You might have a very secure relationship with yourself, but if you don’t trust your partner to be emotionally available and safe, you can’t possibly feel securely attached to them.

Let’s take Zoe, a former client of mine, who grew up with an anxious attachment but did a lot of work on herself. Through therapy, self-help, and a commitment to ongoing growth, she learned to better understand and manage her emotions, to trust herself and her worthiness, to better understand what she needed to feel close in her relationship, as well as how to be a more loving and attentive partner. As an outgrowth of her authentic connection with herself, she learned how to experience authentic connections with others. While Zoe’s secure attachment with herself helped her relationship improve, her partner, Ezra, was struggling with alcohol addiction. Naturally, Ezra’s addiction was getting in the way of their connection and Zoe’s emotional safety in the relationship. When Ezra didn’t come home at night without calling, or picked fights when he was drinking, this understandably left Zoe unable to trust. She trusted Ezra’s love, but couldn’t trust he would be able to show up for her emotionally in the way she needed. Zoe’s secure relationship with herself helped her manage her relationship pain and show up for Ezra in the most supportive way possible without compromising her own boundaries. But it didn’t help her feel secure in her relationship until Ezra was able to start working on his addiction and begin showing up in ways that gradually helped Zoe feel secure in the relationship.

No matter how secure you are as an individual, you aren’t going to feel safe and close to a partner who is emotionally unavailable, unsupportive, or disloyal. But, even in this case, you can maintain security within yourself.

Although securely attached partners are more resilient than their insecure counterparts, even the most secure relationships are vulnerable to excessive stress. Extenuating circumstances such as long-term illnesses, trauma, job loss, discrimination, problems with children, or addiction can exceed one or both partners’ coping mechanisms. While securely attached partners experience rough patches in the relationship, even sometimes to the degree that their relationship takes on an anxious/avoidant dynamic, they are generally more resilient and are able to bounce back more quickly. If not, they are not afraid to reach for help. Although the divorce rate for securely attached relationships is statistically far lower than those of insecurely attached relationships, secure partners don’t always stay in relationships that are no longer working. They are, however, more likely to separate with intention and in a way that maintains mutual respect.

If you have a secure attachment, you aren’t perfect and you don’t aspire to be. You’ll feel insecure sometimes and it won’t always bring out the best in you, but these moments are the exceptions rather than the rule. You’re willing to be accountable for moments when you hurt your partner, and can make repairs without spiraling into shame or blame.





Attachment with Self


Attachment styles, as we’ve learned, start with parenting. And, to a large degree, insecure attachment is healed through re-parenting, meaning learning to parent yourself in the right way, and by “right” I mean in a way that fosters your secure attachment with you. Only when you start giving yourself what you need, meeting your own attachment needs for care, comfort, responsiveness, healthy boundaries, and support, can you ever expect to re-create the same in a loving relationship with a loving partner. This doesn’t mean you need to leave your relationship or even avoid relationships until you’ve arrived at some predetermined level of enlightenment. Not at all. In fact, learning to better show up for yourself will parallel how you show up to your partner. Because when you start growing, your relationship will start growing, too.

How secure is your relationship with yourself? Are you able to validate your own feelings, treat yourself with warmth and respect, provide self-comfort? Are you willing to understand yourself through the lens of your attachment history instead of through the lens of shame? Do you beat yourself up and constantly tell yourself you’re not good enough, flawed, unlovable? Or do you give yourself the benefit of the doubt and accept yourself for all of you, even the parts you want to work on? Do you practice soothing your big feelings? If not, you’re at risk of having unrealistic expectations of what a partner can provide, and you won’t be able to give these things to your partner because we simply can’t give to a partner what we can’t first give to ourselves.

Also, what are your expectations of others? Do you automatically assume others won’t like you or are out to get you? Do you expect more than what anyone can (or should) reasonably give? Do you assume all relationships are doomed to fail? Do you romanticize budding relationships only to feel let down later? Do you believe you’re only safe with other people if you’re better-than: more attractive, more successful, more intelligent, and so on? The answer to these questions will speak volumes about the working models of attachment within you. If you have an insecure attachment, the work is to begin to shift your relationship with your humanity as a whole.

What about the logistical part of self-parenting: How is your self-care? Do you make an effort to take care of yourself physically (nutrition, exercise, sunlight, etc.)? If not, you’re going to be less resilient to relationship stress and more likely to be reactive because it’s challenging to show up as your best self when you simply don’t feel good.

I wrote Secure Love to help you focus on one part of your life, a very big part of your life: your romantic relationship. But there are many other parts of your humanity to nurture. The more you learn to nurture yourself, the more all the parts will work together and feed off each other. So today when you make the choice to eat more vegetables, or tonight when you put the screen down and get an extra hour of sleep, or tomorrow morning when you take five minutes to journal about your intentions, recognize that each of these seemingly small acts isn’t just for your own health; they’re also ways in which you’re actively working on your relationship… it all matters.





Attachment Styles in Other Relationships


In this book we’re talking specifically about attachment styles as they relate to the parent-child relationships where they were first formed, and the adult romantic relationships where they show up today. Attachment styles show up most strongly in relationships where the emotional stakes are the highest, and emotional stakes are the highest when attachment needs are the highest. Most likely, no matter how much you love your best friend and will experience a strong attachment to them, you will still have higher attachment needs in an established relationship with your romantic partner. What about other, more casual relationships? Does your attachment style show up in these? Yes and no. Yes, in the sense that attachment issues will often impact the way we respond to others even in the most casual of circumstances. No, in the sense that for attachment styles to be most alive, there needs to be high attachment significance in the relationship: the emotional stakes must be high, the loss of the person would lead to intense grief, and you must need to depend on the person for your emotional, physical, sexual, and/or cooperation (sharing a life together) needs to be met.

For example, as I mentioned earlier in the chapter, you might have an employer who in many ways reminds you of your mother. As a result, you might react to his complaints similarly to how you react to your mom’s. But while you might rely on your employer for some of your needs, most of us don’t rely on our employers to be an emotional support system, or for physical affection. In the event that you were to lose your mother, your grief would be powerful and lasting, much more so than if you were to lose your employer. So while your attachment style may play into your more casual relationships, it will interfere to a far lesser degree than in the relationships we’re talking about here.

Attachment styles don’t exist in a vacuum. Partners play off each other as if dancing, each responding to the moves of the other. They often show up to the relationship with the attachment styles they developed in childhood, and together these pairs replicate the dynamics they know. But sometimes things aren’t so clear-cut and people end up with partners who bring out different sides of them. Or stressful circumstances change present-day relationship dynamics. Let’s say, for example, one partner becomes depressed in response to a job loss and emotionally retreats. Their otherwise securely attached partner doesn’t understand how depression impacts a person and takes the retreat as a sign of a lack of investment in the relationship. Understandably, this can cause feelings of insecurity and, when the circumstances add up, create an anxious attachment. People with anxious attachments are prone to anxious behaviors. Anxious behaviors motivate the other partner’s avoidant behaviors. Avoidant behaviors motivate the other partner’s anxious behaviors, and on and on it goes.

But attachment change works the other way, too. When one partner starts to become more secure, they add safety and health to the relationship. Eventually most people will start responding to safety with more safety. This is how attachment security is established to begin with: one person (usually the parent) creates an emotionally safe environment, and the other person (the child) has little need to respond with defenses and protections. Instead, connection and problem-solving are the name of the game.





Identifying Your Partner’s Attachment Style


It might be tempting, as you read this book, to want to “diagnose” your partner’s attachment style and try to “fix” their insecure attachment. If you fall into the anxiously attached category, this can be an especially compelling approach—you’re the one whose style involves trying hard to close the emotional distance in the relationship, so it stands to reason you will be the one actively pushing for change. I like for partners to focus on themselves, but I also think it’s hugely important for them to understand their partner. Having a sense of your partner’s attachment style will help you understand their core needs and fears, and why they behave the way they do. It will help you see your partner with compassion in especially hard moments, or when they behave in ways that you might find especially difficult. For example, let’s say your partner gets defensive when you bring up a concern that’s not even related to your relationship. In the past you might have assumed they were simply being dismissive, or even rude. Armed with your new understanding of attachment styles, now you might think, “Hmmm… this seems like a moment when they’re worried they won’t be able to fix the problem and it brings up fears of failing. Maybe it’s not about being dismissive at all, but about their need to stay safe with me.”

That said, beware of trying to change your partner. It’s a losing battle. Instead, I want you to focus on changing the relationship environment. That is an overarching goal of this book and we’ll talk about it more and develop the skills for that as we go. Using an understanding of your partner’s attachment style to shift the environment, rather than trying to change or even shame them, is the best way for them to change, and that change ultimately needs to come from them. The good news is that the more you work on yourself and your relationship environment, the more likely your partner is to follow suit. Change begets change; growth begets growth.





PART TWO

Understanding How You Conflict—and How to Repair





CHAPTER FOUR What Is Your Negative Cycle?





Identifying your attachment style is incredibly helpful when it comes to understanding your core attachment needs and attachment fears, as well as the attachment needs and fears of your partner. It helps put a finger on what you need from your partner to feel close, and what your partner needs from you so that they can feel close. It helps you understand why, when your needs go unmet or when you’re afraid they will go unmet, each of you feels compelled to behave in certain ways, even when you think you “should know better.” Becoming familiar with your attachment styles provides the first step to improving your relationship.

Next, we’re going to look at how you and your partner’s attachment styles come together in the relationship as a dynamic. This includes taking a close look at how each of you might be fueling or perpetuating conflict. Armed with a deeper understanding of what is within each of you as individuals, combined with the understanding of what happens between the two of you as a couple, you can learn to behave in new, more productive ways that will spark connection in the moment and foster secure love in the big picture.

If you have an insecure attachment, it’s almost certain that you and your partner have difficulty resolving conflict or reaching for and responding to bids for emotional connection. For anxious or disorganized partners, the desperation to be heard and responded to by your partner will often cause you to blame, protest, criticize, or accuse them during an argument. This is your way of trying to be acknowledged for your pain, create change, seek closeness, and protect how you view yourself. If you have an avoidant attachment, on the other hand, you often feel compelled to defend yourself, deflect your partner’s concerns, stonewall (sometimes called “the silent treatment”), or retreat from the relationship. This is your way of trying to protect how your partner views you, protect the relationship from conflict, protect how you view yourself, and/or protect your sense of independence.

Sue Johnson, in her book Hold Me Tight, calls these common conflict behaviors “demon dialogue,” and even though it’s so easy to go there in tough moments, they don’t help your relationship thrive. Instead they feed off of each other: Partner A brings up a concern (often in an accusatory manner), Partner B feels attacked and gets defensive, Partner A feels invalidated for their experience and protests back, Partner B deflects the blame, Partner A feels unheard and protests even more, and Partner B shuts down. Resolution is stalled and connection is damaged.

This pattern (and similar variations) is called a “negative cycle.”

Most negative cycles will mirror the overall attachment pattern of the relationship. An anxious/avoidant couple will have pursue/withdraw negative cycles similar to the one I’ve just described (most of the time the anxious partner will be the pursuer during a conflict, but not always). Avoidant/avoidant couples will avoid conflict, but at the expense of resolution of problems and relationship depth. Anxious/anxious couples will have the most escalated and aggressive cycles with heavy blame. (Those with disorganized attachments are less predictable but will typically show up in the anxious role.) While each couple I treat has their own version of this cycle and different topics that will ignite it, you’d be surprised at how consistent negative cycle patterns are from couple to couple.

The negative communication cycle is usually set into motion when two insecurely attached partners attempt to talk about a difficult topic. However, the topic doesn’t have to be that difficult, as is common between two people who suddenly flare up about a seemingly minor daily routine. Let’s see it in action. Marcus and Cassie are working professionals with two young children. Cassie likes to cook and usually makes dinner, and Marcus does the dishes. They share other responsibilities, such as deep cleaning and laundry. Marcus makes sure the bills are paid on time and Cassie does the grocery shopping. One evening, Marcus finishes cleaning after a delicious dinner, when Cassie goes to get a glass of water and notices crumbs on the counter. “I don’t understand,” Cassie says to Marcus, pointing out the crumbs. “Why won’t you just finish the job?”

“It’s not a big deal, you’re making a problem out of nothing,” Marcus mumbles under his breath.

“You never take my concerns seriously,” Cassie asserts. “Would it be that hard for you to just do it the way I’ve asked? Do you even care about what I want?”

Cassie and Marcus go back and forth like this until eventually, Marcus gives up. “Forget it,” he says, before wiping up the crumbs, leaving the kitchen, and distracting himself on his phone. Cassie follows him into the other room, trying to continue the argument, but Marcus is done. “I don’t want to talk about it anymore,” he says. “I’m fine, the kitchen is clean. Let’s just drop it.”

Cassie leaves the room, and they pass the next hour in separate areas of the house.

Obviously, this argument isn’t just about crumbs. While this story depicts the facts of what happened between Marcus and Cassie, it reveals only a small fraction of what’s actually going on between them. Let’s retell the story of the negative cycle between Marcus and Cassie through the lens of their unmet attachment needs:

Cassie sees the crumbs left on the counter. Crumbs make Cassie anxious. Since she has repeatedly expressed her need for a clean counter to Marcus, she concludes that Marcus doesn’t care about her needs. Cassie, like all partners, longs to feel cared for and responded to. Her attachment behavioral system kicks in (remember, this system motivates us to feel distress when attachment is threatened), leaving her feeling unseen and alone. Cassie’s nervous system tries to recover her attachment safety by moving her into anger, which motivates her to take action. She tries to communicate her dejection to Marcus by protesting his behavior, but this leaves Marcus feeling attacked and unappreciated.

In his mind, he’s doing his best. When Cassie points out the few crumbs on the counter, he feels like he can’t get anything right no matter how hard he tries. Marcus longs to feel appreciated by Cassie and as if he won’t be defined by what he gets wrong. He also wants to protect his sense of self, which feels violated when he perceives Cassie as “talking down” to him. By deflecting Cassie’s concerns, Marcus is trying to get her to have a change of heart so that he can feel safe in her eyes as well as in his own. But the deflection makes Cassie feel that her distress is unseen and her concerns invalidated. Meanwhile Marcus’s stress level is rising, so he tries to keep things from escalating by wiping up the crumbs. He feels defeated, and wishes Cassie would just let things go so they could enjoy the evening together. Cassie, on the other hand, feels abandoned. She wishes Marcus could help her feel heard and cared for. Cassie is mad at Marcus, but she’d rather pull him back in than feel alone—this is why she followed him into another room to keep the argument going—but at this point Marcus has detached from his feelings. He doesn’t want to feel worse and has no interest in reengaging.

Here’s a visual example of the beginning of the negative cycle between Marcus and Cassie. Notice that Cassie’s reactiveness triggers Marcus’s vulnerability, and that Marcus’s reactiveness triggers Cassie’s vulnerability:



Marcus and Cassie’s tension lasts through the night, and the resulting distance feels uncomfortable for both. At some point it becomes too much and they find their way back to each other. They don’t explicitly make up—there are no apologies and no discussion of what happened—but they both try to let go of the kitchen incident and move on, because they know they don’t have the skills to actually manage the deeper implications of the conflict: attachment safety and unfulfilled longings. Marcus and Cassie feel close again in the moment, but eventually, days or weeks later, they find themselves back in their negative cycle, struggling with the same attachment ruptures.

When you and your partner enter a negative communication cycle, you’re managing two problems at once. Your awareness is focused on the surface-level conversation, about crumbs, finances, an affair, breaking plans, or whatever topic creates conflict in the moment. These problems are real, and your relationship won’t work unless you and your partner can find ways to resolve them. But that’s virtually impossible when another, much more powerful conversation—about unmet attachment needs—is lurking below the surface. Most of the time partners aren’t even fully aware this secondary conversation is taking place. The unspoken dialogue here is about big stuff: “Are you going to hear me? Do my needs matter to you? Do you respect me? How much do you appreciate me? Can you understand and validate my perspective? Do you see me as failing you because I got it wrong?”

All couples have topics that are heated for them, and each might be especially vulnerable in one or more of the four Cs of their relationship: comfort, connection, cooperation, and conflict. You and your partner might have a hard time with conversations about parenting styles (cooperation), for example. For you, this hot topic is going to make it more likely you go into a negative cycle than, say, talking about how you like to spend time together (connection). Maybe that’s an area where you see eye to eye. But even the most heated of topics don’t cause negative cycles. Negative cycles happen when couples are communicating with each other in ways that create attachment ruptures. Just because a topic is tough doesn’t mean that the discussion around the topic should inspire feelings of being unappreciated, unheard, and invalidated. This is one of the most fundamental differences between insecurely attached couples and securely attached ones. Securely attached couples can work through differences while maintaining safety and connection.

During a fight (if, like Cassie and Marcus, one partner is pursuing and the other is withdrawing—which is the case the vast majority of the time), the avoidant partner’s insecure attachment essentially says, “I’m not aware of my own vulnerable feelings so I can’t possibly see yours!” This reinforces the anxious partner’s fears about being too much, and their insecure attachment retorts, “I’m going to protest this pain you’re causing by making you see how wrong you are!” This, in turn, reinforces the avoidant partner’s fears of failure. While all this is happening below the surface, above the surface partners are speaking to each other in hurtful ways, causing the tension to escalate. One partner may have “started it”—they may have done or said something, or not done or said something, that created potential for the negative communication cycle to be set into motion—but it takes two to engage and keep it going.

For example, let’s say on a different day Marcus gets triggered when he finds out Cassie made weekend plans for them without first talking to him. He doesn’t want to express his feelings and cause a fight so instead he acts distant. Cassie senses something is wrong and demands to be let in, telling Marcus heatedly that he has no right to shut her out. Marcus continues to say, “It’s nothing, just leave it.” Eventually Cassie pushes hard enough and Marcus explosively tells her that he doesn’t have any say over their lives and that she tries to control him just like her mom tries to control her dad. Cassie cries and eventually Marcus apologizes for overreacting and they leave the topic.

What started this negative cycle? The way Marcus communicated his trigger combined with the way Cassie responded. They both created the negative cycle. Had Marcus managed his feelings about not being consulted by saying something along the lines of “I appreciate the effort you put into making our plans, but at the same time it feels important to me to have more input—can we talk about it?” then the chances are higher that the negative cycle would’ve been avoided. But even if Marcus expressed himself in the worst way possible, Cassie can still avoid getting sucked into it by taking ownership of her response, which in our example might sound like “I know it can be hard for you to bring up topics that in the past have caused fights, but I’m sensing some distance from you and it’s uncomfortable for me. I feel shut out. When it feels safe, I hope you’ll bring it up to me. I’m not going to pressure you, but I’ll be here when you’re ready.” This isn’t necessarily a magic wand, but it is a way to prevent an ugly negative cycle and it will make it more likely they can eventually have a safer conversation around the topic of weekend plans. Either partner can do or say something that makes it highly likely a negative cycle will be set into motion, but ultimately it takes two to make it happen and keep it going.

Once a negative cycle is in motion and nobody is doing anything to interrupt it (we’ll learn about that soon), the back-and-forth usually ends in painful disconnection, leaving both partners with a profound sense of sadness, anger, demoralization, disconnection, numbness, and/or mixed feelings about the relationship. This period of disconnection can go on for hours, days, or weeks, until the tension becomes too great and they finally reconnect. Unfortunately, at this point the damage—to their relationship trust and closeness—is already done, and the negative cycle has reinforced their original insecure attachment.

Even the most securely attached partners can sometimes speak harshly, get cynical or critical, roll their eyes, or get overly defensive when presented with a concern. And even the most securely attached partners sometimes have trouble saying to themselves, “I know my partner is just tired and that this moment doesn’t define their feelings for me.” Even secure partners get reactive. Yes, couples with secure attachments experience fewer negative cycles, and these cycles get less escalated when they do happen, but another critical difference between securely and insecurely attached couples is the ability to make repairs. Secure couples can get out of the bad weather and back into their climate of safety. As you learn how to manage your negative cycle (which we’ll get into shortly), keep in mind that we’re shooting for progress, not for perfection. Learning to manage a negative cycle happens through practice.

In Marcus and Cassie’s case, the argument eventually ran its course and they found their way back to each other. This likely happens to you, too. Fighting is exhausting and upsetting, and when it starts to feel like too much, partners tend to “let it go.” But don’t be fooled: just because Marcus and Cassie let the crumbs incident go doesn’t mean they’ve repaired. The real problem still exists: Cassie felt unresponded to, and Marcus felt as if he wasn’t being treated with appreciation and respect… all of which are attachment ruptures that, when repeated over and over again and left unrepaired, can cumulatively do a lot of damage. And on top of that, Marcus and Cassie never came to any agreement about how to go forward when it comes to their differences in cleaning preferences. Negative cycles are notorious for blocking resolution to whatever surface problem kick-started the cycle. For two people—any two people, not just romantic partners—to be able to come together and work through a problem, there needs to be some degree of emotional safety. Negative cycles aren’t emotionally safe; they are the opposite of emotional safety. How can you and your partner come to an agreement on how to parent, where to live, how to save money, or even what to have for dinner if every time you try to talk about it, you end up feeling unheard, attacked, and invalidated… not exactly a breeding ground for sustainable cooperation?





The Anatomy of a Trigger


What exactly is a trigger, beyond the vague definition of “something that makes you upset”?

In short, a “trigger” is when your attachment behavioral system (ABS) experiences an attachment threat and gets activated to take action and find safety. It’s easy to think triggers are singular experiences, because they happen so fast, in a fraction of a second. But in truth, triggers are a combination of experiences within your brain and body that are set into motion by the triggering event (your partner’s eye roll, for example), all of which culminate in a reaction.

Triggering events create an overt or subtle sensation in your body (secure, anxious, and disorganized partners are more likely to be aware of their bodily sensations, while avoidant partners are less likely to be aware), and then your brain makes a meaning of the sensation, including the perception that there’s been an attachment rupture or unfulfilled longing for closeness. This causes vulnerable emotions such as fear, grief, and shame to well up. Up to this point, much of this is subconscious, especially if you’re new to getting to know your inner world.

Since most humans will go to great lengths to avoid feeling pain, your pain will ignite a reactive feeling that motivates you to take some sort of action (words or behavior) to “make the pain go away!” Whatever action you take is intended to help you get back to safety, although it often has the opposite effect. To help you better understand your feelings and name them so that you can start expressing them, which we’ll be doing a lot of throughout the remainder of the book, I’ve included a list of common relationship feelings in the appendix.

While there are many reactive feelings partners can experience in negative cycles, including bitterness, neglected, humiliated, and overwhelmed, a common one is anger (or its other versions, such as frustration, annoyance, or rage). Anger is a strong motivator and it inspires us to do something, anything, to change what’s making us hurt. Couples therapist and author George Faller, LMFT, aptly describes anger as that which provides us with the hope things will change. This is not to say that getting stuck in anger, using anger as a justification to behave poorly, or showing it exclusively and at the expense of the deeper emotions is a good idea. But when we can reframe anger as hope it becomes easier to validate it, and there’s no better way to soothe anger and make space for the deeper emotions than to validate it.

Let’s play this out: Your partner rolls their eyes, and you feel your chest tighten. Your brain says, “They’re mad and when people are mad that means they don’t love me. I don’t feel loved by my partner in this moment.” Along with this experience comes a sense of loss and fear. As a reaction to this primal pain, your nervous system amps up, this time with indignance, which screams, “You don’t deserve to be treated like this, you need to let them know this isn’t okay!” Then the anger comes out as a reaction: “How dare you roll your eyes at me!”

But what you’re really trying to say is, “Ouch, I’m hurting. I’m afraid you’re mad at me and on top of that now I feel unlovable to you. It’s easy for me to go there because the wounded part of me already believes I’m unlovable. I need you to know how much I’m hurting, but I don’t know how to say it (and you might not be able to hear me anyway). Maybe if I show you how mad I am, you’ll get the message and you won’t want to hurt me anymore. So I get big and tell you off.” But what does your partner see? Not the hurt, not the fear, not the self-beliefs that haunt you, not the attachment longing to feel safe and close. Sadly, all they see is the anger. Most likely it’s not going to land well. I’m not asking you to deny the anger part, and we’ll talk more about safely validating anger, but problems arise when that’s all we see, when we only get a piece of the whole picture. When the rest of our humanity, the soft side, the connecting side, gets lost.

Here’s a diagram of the full experience of a trigger. This example is relevant to someone with an anxious or disorganized attachment. I’ve used another example for avoidant attachment in chapter 5:



It’s important to understand the breakdown of a trigger because understanding what’s happening in your brain and body when you feel like fighting back or fleeing will give you something to work with. By recognizing your triggers, you can step back, look inward, and say, “What’s going on with me right now? What meaning am I making right now? Is it accurate, or based on past wounds, or a little bit of both?” or “What’s happening in my body? I’m holding my breath. Let’s breathe for a minute,” or “Okay, this is really big. What can I do differently right now instead of reacting in a way that won’t get me anywhere I really want to go?” In short, understanding your triggers is empowering.

Now that we have an idea of how a trigger plays out within each partner, let’s look at how each partner’s triggers play out between the two of them as a negative cycle. Let’s revisit Marcus and Cassie’s argument over the crumbs:

Cassie was the first to be triggered, and she reacted by protesting. Her protests triggered Marcus and he reacted with dismissiveness, and on and on it went. The intention here is to show the pattern, not to place judgment on either Marcus or Cassie, or to determine “who started it.” The truth is that this pattern isn’t about this one moment; it’s about a history of unrepaired attachment ruptures that keeps showing up… as if begging to be healed.

For those of you who are interested, I’ve included charts that list the common negative cycle behaviors for anxious and avoidant partners in the appendix.





Unrepaired Negative Cycles


Have you ever wondered why you and your partner got along so well at the beginning of your relationship, but now things feel so different? Most partners start off their relationship with a blank slate, each partner feeling seen and valued. Then the first conflict hits. You find out he’s still friends with his ex. She’s always running late, and you finally bring it up. He snubs your friends. She pouts when you go somewhere without her. If the two of you have relatively secure attachments, you’ll work through these conflicts with an intact relationship. Maybe it will take more than one conversation as you learn to navigate your differences, disappointments, and relationship boundaries, but you’ll get through it or you’ll decide to part ways (which, if done from a place of intention, is a version of “getting through it”). But if you have insecure attachments, you’re probably going to go into your first negative cycle. The fight or argument will run its course and when it’s all over, your need to reconnect will eventually take center stage and you’ll make up. But the negative cycle made a small dent in the relationship—not enough to lose all hope, but enough to shake up trust a bit. You each think, “It will be okay. We can prevent that from happening again.” But because you talked about whatever the problem was while in a negative cycle, there wasn’t space for it to get resolved and maybe the “repair” was just pushing it under the rug. Negative cycles prevent the true repair work from happening and so you start avoiding the problem, until you go out with your friends again and it rears its ugly head.

That first negative cycle also created a bit of distance between you and your partner. Maybe just a morsel, but enough for your nervous system to worry that “if I bring up issues, I’m going to get a response I don’t like,” or “I won’t feel understood if we start talking about hard topics.” Still, it’s early in the relationship, there’s still a lot of trust and hope, and you make your way back.

But then there’s another rupture. This time it’s a little worse: you go a little bit farther away from each other, because you’re not only addressing the new issue at hand, but you’re also managing the old wounds from the unresolved last cycle. You come back to each other, again, but the distance has grown. You’ve lost some trust and maybe hope. You can see how, over a course of weeks or months or years, some couples end up too far away from each other and the distance never gets fully closed.





The Negative Cycle and the Anxious/Avoidant Couple


The vast majority of the couples I treat are in an anxious/avoidant dynamic—it’s a very common pairing for a few common reasons many of you will relate to. Anxious partners know they want connection, but don’t know what real emotional support feels like to give or receive. Because avoidant partners are often the pursuers during the dating phase, the anxious partner initially feels wanted, but this isn’t the same as long-term intimacy. On top of this, avoidant partners like to feel successful, and in the beginning of a relationship when the anxious partner is enamored with them, they do feel successful. But as negative cycles increase, they start feeling unsuccessful and pull away. As they pull away, the anxious partner moves in closer and the avoidant partner begins to feel smothered. Avoidant partners initially enjoy the emotional expressiveness of the anxious partner because it helps them feel things they can’t feel on their own. As things progress, the anxious partner’s emotions feel less exciting and more overwhelming and the avoidant partner pulls away. The anxious partner is often initially drawn to the avoidant partner’s emotional stability, although later it becomes evident that the stability comes at the cost of true emotional engagement. In response, the anxious partner becomes more anxious and demanding. Gradually they begin to resent the very traits in each other that drew them together.

Yet they often keep going despite all of this. Why? Because all relationships do their best to find emotional balance. Relationships that don’t settle into a balance often don’t last. When two people who come into the relationship lacking emotional balance within (the anxious partner overwhelmed by emotion, the avoidant partner detached from emotions), the second-best version is for them to find balance between them, each taking responsibility for a fragment of the relationship at the expense of being whole selves. In the anxious/avoidant dynamic, the anxious-attached partner pushes hard for resolution or connection, while the avoidant partner pushes back as a protection against conflict neither of them knows how to navigate, as well as protecting against an unhealthy level of “closeness” (which isn’t closeness at all, but enmeshment). One seeks whatever connection can be had, while the other works to maintain as much emotional stability as possible. In a healthy relationship each partner works more or less equally for both.

Here’s an example of how the balancing act might show up in real life. Imagine a couple having an argument in public. The anxious partner is more likely to become escalated, even at the expense of being noticed by others. The avoidant partner is more likely to try to avoid calling attention from those nearby who might overhear the argument. This is because anxious partners prioritize resolution and reconnection, while avoidant partners are more concerned with avoiding the shame of being noticed by others. Both of them are valid in their needs to feel safe, but when partners are more securely attached they are in touch with each other’s personal needs to find reconnection and avoid making a scene.

When negative cycles and unrepaired ruptures build up, even partners who don’t fit into traditional categories of attachment styles will take on an anxious/avoidant pattern to maintain the attachment balance. This can be true regardless of how you may have shown up in past romantic relationships. If someone has a mild insecure attachment but their partner has a stronger one, the first partner may shift toward avoidance to adapt to the relationship and keep the balancing act intact.

Anxious/avoidant couples are second only to secure/secure couples when it comes to the odds of relationship longevity, and that’s because of the way their negative cycles play out, not in spite of it. Partners in an anxious/anxious pairing will have constant, highly escalated, negative cycles. Avoidant/avoidant pairings will have fewer negative cycles, but at the expense of resolution and connection. This eventually breeds resentment and harms whatever connection they do have. Anxious/avoidant pairings are like the Goldilocks of insecure couples, the middle ground. If you’re an anxious partner bringing up concerns with blame, criticism, and “you need to change or else,” you’re really trying to close the distance between you and your partner because, well, who else is going to? If you’re an avoidant partner invalidating your anxious partner’s concerns, saying what they want to hear so it will all go away, you’re trying to turn down the heat because, again, who else is going to? In anxious/anxious relationships, there is no one to turn down the heat. In avoidant/avoidant relationships, the lack of heat is the very problem.

Don’t get me wrong: having the potential for a sustainable relationship doesn’t equate to having a thriving relationship. Anxious/avoidant relationships work if we’re speaking about longevity, but the cost is high. The cost, in the long run, is relationship health. Say you break your leg and can’t bear weight for weeks. Your other leg will get stronger to create balance, but healing is when both legs have equal strength. The same is true in relationships: healing is when both partners are secure; not when one is fighting for connection and resolution while the other is fighting to keep things from getting out of control or enmeshed.

Here’s a textbook anxious/attached dynamic:

Abhay, an anxious-attached partner, approaches his avoidant-attached partner Divya after spending a weekend with Divya’s extended family. “You don’t pay attention to me when we’re with your family, it’s like I’m not even there,” Abhay says. Divya instantly makes sense of the protest by reasoning that Abhay is trying to keep her from her family. “I’m just enjoying my family!” she says. “Are you suggesting I shouldn’t spend time with my family when we’re with them?” Looking below the surface of the conflict, Abhay is fighting to feel valued and responded to and Divya is fighting for her sense of self. Abhay is acting out his anxious attachment with blame. Divya is acting out her avoidant attachment by reacting to Abhay’s (poorly delivered) concerns with a lack of curiosity and counterblame.

While this pattern doesn’t feel good for either, to behave differently would mean taking a huge emotional risk. The only way out is for one or both partners to start reaching and responding to the other in new ways. In Abhay’s mind, if he quits protesting with accusations and blame, he risks getting no attention from Divya at all; Divya thinks that if she quits pushing back and dismissing Abhay’s concerns, she risks losing her sense of self and feeling weak and invisible. So both Abhay and Divya cling to their insecure ways of communicating with each other, to the detriment of the relationship and of their own growth as individuals. To get out of this cycle, they need to improve their relationship environment and shift negative cycles into bonding cycles.





The Real Enemy


When you and your partner are triggered, hurling insults at each other, criticizing, and giving each other the silent treatment, you may look like and feel like enemies. But it’s so important to remember that you’re not. Your partner is not the enemy; the negative cycle is the enemy.

You’re both fighting for closeness, but in conflicting ways that were a learned response from pain in childhood. You want your relationship to work, so by definition, you are not enemies. The negative cycle you’re in makes it appear that you’re trying to hurt each other, when in reality you’re trying to reach each other. In the terribly painful moments after you and your partner are triggered, your attachment fears and activated attachment system are in the driver’s seat. You both have unmet attachment needs, you both are hurting, and you both are trying to stay safe with yourself and with each other; you just don’t know how. As a result, you devolve into a negative cycle, which is actually the very thing keeping you stuck. Not only are you unable to resolve the problem at hand, but you can’t dig out of this place of emotional unsafety and disconnection.

I once received the following in an email from a former client who gave me permission to include it here:

Something that really helped me when I first learned about the negative cycle, is that my anxious attempt for connection—“reaching out” that was aggressive in a way I was blind to at the time—only made my avoidant partner more scared/avoidant, which in turn only made me more anxious and reach out even more (aggressively), which caused him to retreat even more—and thus the negative cycle intensified and left each of us feeling so much more alone and isolated when we were seeking connection. It helped me realize how crazy-making the negative cycle is and how useless it is to react from the same place (most days :)) and help break those habits, no matter how hard they are. It later also helped me be able to see my partner’s reaction to me as a reflection on what I hadn’t resolved yet in myself and where I needed to attend to my needs.



The negative cycle, as my former client so elegantly acknowledged, not only keeps you and your partner stuck in an enemy mindset, it also reinforces each of your insecure attachments as individuals, and the insecure attachment in the relationship as a whole. Negative cycles are like insecure attachment prisons. When Cassie hears Marcus say “it’s not a big deal,” she thinks her greatest attachment fear has been confirmed: she’s unlovable and unworthy of being responded to. It also confirms her attachment fear that Marcus won’t be there for her when she needs him. Now that Cassie perceives all of her insecurity within herself and her insecurity with Marcus to have been confirmed, what does she do? She acts the way someone with an insecure attachment would: reactively and with protest. Then the process starts again on Marcus’s side. In short, they are each stuck in their insecure attachments. It sounds demoralizing, I know. But it’s not, because in this book, we’ll walk through exactly how to empower yourself and get out of this trap.

As painful as negative cycles can feel, changing your habits is hard. It can be scary. I don’t want to overlook that the work I’m asking you to do takes bravery, especially since these behaviors are often protective measures meant to help us survive. The simple fact that you are here, learning, is a huge step in the right direction. It says that you care, and that you are ready to try something different. And I promise, as difficult as it might be, it will also be empowering and lead you to a place that feels very different and offers real safety and connection, in yourself and in your relationship. When couples can replace the negative cycle with vulnerability and a willingness to take the risks required to get out of each person’s comfort zone, the relationship environment will begin to shift and heal. In the following chapters, you will learn to fix the disconnection between what you’re hoping for—safety and closeness—and how you go about getting it.

Repeat after me: “The negative cycle is the enemy.” Do everything you can to keep this phrase close to your heart. You might even say it to yourself, out loud, during tense moments—this can often create enough of a shift in perspective to regulate or defuse the situation.





From Negative Cycles to Bonding Cycles


Have you ever noticed that during the makeup phase of a fight, you and your partner feel extra close to each other? Sure, maybe you pushed the issue under the rug rather than actually repairing any damage, and maybe the issue will show up again later, but for this moment, things feel so good.

How can this be when you just treated each other like enemies? Because negative cycles wouldn’t exist without emotional investment and vulnerability. For some couples, their vulnerability is only seen during fights and makeups, when it tends to come out whether they want it to or not.

Maybe you’ve observed this in a couple you know. They seem to be addicted to fighting, which some couples become because that’s where the emotional connection is. I know this sounds paradoxical—negative cycles, after all, destroy connection. While there are multiple downsides and I don’t advocate for this strategy, the fact remains that fighting can be a way for some couples to close the distance when they don’t know how else to do so. At least it’s a form of engagement, and for some partners, negative engagement is better than no engagement; also, the makeup phase can feel especially connecting.

When couples can learn how to avoid negative cycles, interrupt negative cycles, and repair negative cycles—all of which you will learn to do in the chapters to come—what they’re really doing is learning how to directly access their vulnerabilities and communicate about them in a more measured way than is possible during escalated fights. This communication about vulnerabilities promotes connection, and this is the essence of a bonding cycle. Once you learn to take triggered, vulnerable moments and turn them into bonding cycles, you can begin to feel even closer to your partner, and even more trusting. You will be much more likely to create the space needed for real resolution to the problem at hand. Not to mention, bonding creates resiliency for the future. Recognizing, managing, and getting ahead of negative cycles isn’t merely a protective measure; it will strengthen even the most secure relationships. All of this is to say, no matter how bad your negative communication cycles might feel, there is hope.





CHAPTER 5 Interrupting the Negative Cycle





In any given moment in a negative cycle, even when it feels like you’re locked in as tight as you’ve ever been, the truth is that you’re not. You and your partner each have an opportunity to interrupt the toxic back-and-forth and stop. It takes two to perpetuate the negative cycle, but only one to stop. When you’re in a negative cycle, the temptation to protect yourself and let your partner know that everything they’re doing is wrong is incredibly strong. It’s so hard, in the moment, to be the first one to say, “Let’s not let this negative cycle win,” or “Instead of saying something I don’t mean, I’m going to try something new,” or “Let’s see if we can get to a healthier place and start talking again in five minutes,” especially when you’ve never learned that sort of dialogue to begin with. But if you can learn to take this step, you may be surprised at how empowering it is, because it allows you to manage the negative cycle with intention, instead of letting it control you with reckless abandon.

When I’m working with a couple, the first thing I do after introducing the concept of the negative cycle is to teach them how to interrupt it. You won’t always be able to prevent negative cycles. This is especially true at the beginning of this work, when you and your partner are just wrapping your mind around these concepts, but it will continue to be true later, when your relationship has grown by leaps and bounds. Even the healthiest of couples find themselves stuck in negative cycles from time to time. We’re all human. We all get tired, hungry, and stressed. In this chapter we’re going to learn how to stop the negative cycle in its tracks once it gets going. But, while there’s nothing you can do to entirely prevent negative cycles or to always be able to interrupt them after they’ve taken on a momentum, there’s a lot you can do in any given moment to increase the odds you’ll be able to do so.

In the next chapter we’ll discuss how to prevent the negative cycle, which includes building an environment that is generally resistant to negative cycles (this is called an “attachment-friendly environment”). We’re doing it in this order for two reasons. First, it takes time to build the attachment-friendly environment that prevents negative cycles, and even then you’ll never be able to prevent them entirely. Also, while we’re learning how to prevent the cycles, we need a plan B for when they happen anyway. That’s where interruption comes in. Finally, knowing how to successfully interrupt negative cycles is an important component of the attachment-friendly environment that prevents them. So for now, let’s focus on stabilization.





Acknowledging the Problem


How do you know when you and your partner are in a negative cycle? Sometimes it will be obvious: you’re in a heated argument or fight. Sometimes it’s more subtle and you’ll need to check in with yourself. If you’re interacting with your partner and something doesn’t feel right, the odds are high that you’re in a negative cycle or you’re headed for one. It’s important to learn to recognize the first feeling of discomfort. You might notice feeling apprehensive, annoyed, shocked, or let down by your partner. You might feel deflated or blindsided. You might notice thoughts like “here we go again,” or “he never does what I ask!” Any thoughts that have a flavor of blaming or of being offended, or that might frame your partner as the enemy, could be indications that you’re in the negative feedback loop. It’s also important to pay attention to what might be going on with your partner. Are you sensing tension in their words or body language? What’s happening with the communication? Are you noticing subtle or overt jabs? Do you feel defensive? Are you needing to get louder to be heard?

I can’t emphasize enough how important it is to practice catching these moments. If you can’t see them, you can’t fix them. When you catch the first sign of a trigger, you have the opportunity to step back and check in with yourself. You might say, “Hmmm, that felt bad, what’s going on? I notice I’m feeling flushed. What is my body telling me?” Not only does a check-in help you understand more about what happened, but it also helps you plan your next move with more intention and less reaction. According to psychologist Dr. Viktor Frankl, “Between stimulus and response there is a space. In that space is our power to choose our response. In our response lies our growth and our freedom.”

Even if you don’t have the capacity to “plan” because you’re too dysregulated, catching a trigger can at least buy you some time to do something less destructive (progress, not perfection). Even a couple of seconds can be the difference between “I should’ve never married you!” (when you don’t really mean it) and “I’m so angry with you right now!” If your tendencies are more avoidant, a few seconds of self-awareness can be the difference between “I’m not doing this right now, just leave me alone” and “I’m willing to talk about it, but not right at this second. Give me twenty minutes to gather my thoughts.” In the heat of the moment your partner might not like either option, but the latter will be far less triggering.

If you grew up with an insecure attachment, odds are you weren’t taught how to check in, feel your feelings, and take space before responding to a trigger. But I can assure you that with time and practice, you’ll get better at seeing the signs.

Let’s do an exercise to start building awareness. This exercise can be done on your own or with your partner. If you’re completing the process with your partner, each of you should complete the exercise and use it to have a conversation when you’re finished.

Think of a time when you felt one of the following:

Annoyed with your partner

Angry at your partner

Invalidated by your partner

Controlled by your partner

Unheard by your partner

Unappreciated by your partner

Afraid your partner was disappointed or angry with you



Now think about the circumstances surrounding that moment:

What did your partner do or say just before you felt this way?

What meaning did you make of what they said or did?

What happened in your body?

In what way did you feel an urge to react? Argue back? Defend yourself? Get critical? Counterattack? Shut down?

What did you do next?

How would you feel if you didn’t do what you did?

How might your partner have felt when you did what you did?

What did your partner do next?



Here’s an example:

Benjamin remembers a moment when he felt annoyed at his partner Lev while they were talking about a recent news event. He recalls a hot feeling rising up in his core. Upon reflection, he remembers that Lev had been pontificating about the issue for several minutes. When Benjamin tried to engage in the conversation, Lev continued on without acknowledging him. Benjamin felt invisible and the overall meaning he made was that Lev didn’t value him. Benjamin remembers having an urge to tune out and give up on trying to participate, which is what he did. If he didn’t tune out, his annoyance would have turned to anger and he’d rather feel anything but anger. When Lev noticed Benjamin tuning out he said in a snarky tone, “Are you even paying attention to anything I’m saying?” (Of course, Lev had a contributing role in his own disappointment, but right now our focus is on Benjamin’s experience.)

Here’s a diagram of Benjamin’s experience:



Reflecting on what led to past negative cycles and how you and your partner reacted in those moments can help you understand what triggers the negative cycle in your relationship. These insights also help you recognize what your negative cycles look like when they are happening. Our history and patterns repeat themselves, so if you know that in the past you were triggered by your partner using the word overreact, or that your stomach got tied into knots when your partner started heatedly complaining about dirty dishes you left in the sink, you will be better equipped, next time, to recognize what’s happening before it gets out of control.

What might Benjamin have done with this information had he recognized it in the moment? There are a few options. He may have interrupted Lev right then and said something along the lines of “Babe, your opinion is so important to me, but I feel kind of invisible right now. Can we go back and forth a bit more?” Or, if their relationship is more direct, he may have said, “Whoa, you’re on a roll, but give me some space here” (in a cutesy way, not a demeaning one). Or he may have waited until later and said, “Can I talk to you about something?” Any of those options is better than complete disengagement without explanation.

Now let’s look at Lev’s experience:

Lev remembers sharing his thoughts with Benjamin about a recent news event. As he talked he felt a sinking sensation, causing his words to break up. He remembers that just before he felt the sinking, he noticed a zoned-out look on Benjamin’s face. The meaning he made is that Benjamin was not seeing him and so he must not be valuable to him (ironically, the exact experience Benjamin had). Lev tried to ignore it, but the urge to communicate his distress to Benjamin (in an attempt to pull him back in) got the best of him and he finally protested with a snarky edge. If he hadn’t protested he would have felt invisible. Benjamin defensively said, “I was listening to every word.”



With more awareness in the moment, what might Lev have done differently? Maybe he could’ve tried to step into Benjamin’s world and reflect on why Benjamin might be needing to zone out and asked, “Do I have a role in this?” Maybe he could have verbalized his curiosity with validation: “I can sense your distancing. No shame, I’m guessing there’s a good reason for it. Can you tell me what’s going on?” Or maybe he could have simply shared his feelings: “I’m feeling unseen right now… that always give me anxiety.” Again, none of these options will necessarily create the most perfect outcome possible, but they’re certainly better than the alternative and when repeated over time will add to relationship safety.





Get Vulnerable


Negative cycles feel awful. But nobody engages in them randomly or for no reason. If you have an insecure attachment, the relationship behaviors that aren’t working for you in the long run actually, believe it or not, feel safe in the moment. It might not be good for the overall health of your relationship to deflect your partner’s concerns (“What about you? You’re not perfect, either”) but it can feel safer than hearing things that make you feel like a failure or powerless. If there weren’t a short-term payoff to negative cycle behaviors, nobody would engage in them. The short-term payoff? Temporary safety. The cost: long-term relationship health. The solution? Vulnerability.

In the middle of a heated moment, negative cycles give you false hope. While not conscious, your nervous system might be saying, “If I get mean enough, she’ll know how much I’m hurting and I won’t have to feel alone and unseen.” Or, “If I can talk over him and convince him I’m right, he’ll see I’m not a stupid, unworthy person.”

When I ask my clients to interrupt their negative cycles by doing something different—maybe saying “Let me hear what you have to say” instead of “Nothing is ever enough for you”—I’m asking them to give up their sense of hope, in this case the false sense of hope, that if they deflect their partner’s concern they won’t have to face their own uncomfortable feelings around the topic. Nobody wants to give up their hope, even when it’s a false sense, that they can avoid discomfort in the moment. But to make real change you must choose to step away from safety and toward vulnerability.

Many people think vulnerability means sharing your feelings. Sharing your feelings is one way to be vulnerable, but not the only way. Vulnerability means engaging in words or behaviors that expose you to emotional pain. Vulnerability isn’t about how you get vulnerable; that’s different for everyone. It’s about facing your fears of pain. It’s about choosing to stop hiding even when you risk rejection.

I’ve placed emphasis on the word expose, because expose is not the same as guarantee. Getting vulnerable is not a guarantee you’ll be emotionally wounded. In fact, the ultimate goal is to feel better, not worse. But it does mean that you’re willing to take the risk of getting wounded, because if you don’t take the risk, you are guaranteed to miss out on the good things in life: authenticity, connectedness, a sense of empowerment, and/or real resolutions to problems. In my work as an EFT therapist, we like to say “no risk it, no biscuit.” Silly, but true.

To be clear, I’m not advising you to repeatedly put yourself in situations where the odds are high that you’ll end up feeling rejected or mocked. This work isn’t about reckless risk; it’s about measured risk. If you never show anyone the authentic you, you never give them the opportunity to accept or reject you and you’ll never know if an authentic relationship is possible.

A common confusion around the concept of vulnerability is that it’s about your relationship with others. Your capacity to be vulnerable heavily impacts your relationship with others and your partner, but ultimately your vulnerability is about your relationship with you and your own feelings: How will you feel if your partner rejects you after you share more deeply? How will you feel if your partner is dismissive when you say something in a healthier way that they aren’t used to? How will you feel if your partner gets mad when you ask for a break instead of continuing with a negative cycle? Can you survive these feelings if you know that facing them can, over time, help your relationship grow?

Imagine your partner has a bad habit of saying a particular curse word you find offensive. One day you’re having a nice hike together and they say the forbidden word. You lash out in angry protest because in your mind, lashing out is the best way to be heard, and it might actually work. Your partner might be the type more likely to respond if you lash out rather than saying it more calmly. But lashing out is the easy road. Even if it does get temporary results, they come at the expense of the overall health of the relationship. Interactions like this can, over time, create resentment or reinforce a parent/child dynamic or one in which one partner is afraid of the other. Lashing out is a bad habit, not unlike the cursing you don’t like, and what does it mean about the relationship if your partner only responds to aggressive protests?

The vulnerable thing in this situation is to show up less reactively. But for you this is risky; otherwise you’d already be doing it that way. The risk is about how you’re going to feel if you aren’t being heard or responded to. There are a number of reasons why your partner might not be responsive to your repeated requests (and I’m not excusing that), but let’s say hypothetically that your partner associates your gentler approaches with a lack of seriousness, and in the past they’ve just ignored your reasonable tone. It only makes sense you want to say it in the way in which you’re less likely to be ignored. If you get ignored, you’re going to have to face feelings of powerlessness, rejection, and worthlessness. You might be whisked back to your childhood, when you had to choose between being loud or being invisible.

But the problem with this approach is twofold. Not only is a habit of lashing out not good for the relationship or your own dignity, but it also prevents getting to the heart of the problem: the way the two of you negotiate wants, needs, and requests, which is clearly not working. If the heart of the problem isn’t addressed, the pattern—in this case, a lack of responsiveness and aggressive reactions—is only going to show up in other areas of the relationship, even if your partner does stop saying the offensive word.

In order to address the real problem, a deeper conversation is in order. That will require approaching the curse word in a new way when it comes up. And that won’t be comfortable. Doing things that aren’t comfortable, even when they’re for the greater good, requires the willingness to be vulnerable. Do you see the connections?

It’s important to keep in mind that choosing to be vulnerable doesn’t guarantee a desired outcome. If you could guarantee the outcome, there would be no risk and then we couldn’t call it vulnerability.

Here’s an exercise that you can do alone or with a partner to help you better understand where you have room to be more vulnerable.

Think of a moment during a negative cycle when you did or said something that wasn’t helpful for the relationship.

1. Even if it wasn’t conscious, what might you have been hoping for by doing or saying it?

2. What about what you did or said felt safe in the moment?

3. What do you think you could have done or said that would have been better for the relationship?

4. Putting it all together, what was the vulnerable thing for you to do in that moment?



Please note: you might not know what you could’ve done “better.” We still have a lot of skills to learn. Here are some examples to get you thinking:

Shiloh remembers feeling triggered when his partner Tara seemed to be in a bad mood:

I kept asking her “What’s wrong?” and criticizing her for being “dark” even when she said it wasn’t about me and just needed space. I was hoping she’d hear me and get in a better mood. It felt safe to keep going because giving up meant I’d be miserable. The vulnerable thing for me would’ve been saying “okay, I’m here when you’re ready” and giving her space because we all need space sometimes.



Tasha remembers feeling triggered when her partner brought up something from the past when she felt let down by Tasha:

I got angry and told her we’ve already talked about it and why can’t she get over it? I was hoping she would drop it. It felt safe because I didn’t want to get in a fight. The most vulnerable thing I could’ve done was to just listen or even promise her we could talk about it later when I wasn’t distracted.



Carol gets triggered when her partner Richard resorts to character attacks when he gets upset such as “you’re the type of person who can’t handle the truth”:

I usually defend myself by saying things like “That’s not true, I’m always willing to hear you out.” I’m hoping if I can convince him to see it differently, he’ll stop saying it. It feels safe for me to try to make the hurtful words stop. I realize it might be better to validate him by telling him he’s correct that in the past I wasn’t always open to his perspective, and that I want to hear him now but I can’t continue talking if he’s going to attack my character. Setting boundaries brings up my fears of rejection, but by doing it anyway I’ll feel more empowered in the relationship. For me, vulnerable is setting a boundary instead of getting defensive.





Self-Regulation and Co-Regulation


“Is it okay to want comfort from my partner?” is one of the most common questions people ask me on social media. Humans are wired to seek emotional support from our loved ones when we’re sad, mad, lonely, and scared, yet as society has evolved we’ve become increasingly hesitant to rely on others for comfort. Phrases like “you’re responsible for your own feelings” or “nobody can fix your feelings but you” have been taken out of context to the extent that people worry that seeking comfort from their partner is asking for too much, or even a sign of weakness. Yes, we are all responsible for our own feelings, but a part of this responsibility is asking for help when we need it. Seeking support is self-care. Co-regulation is what happens when one partner is in the support role, helping the other feel safe and calm. It is the act of helping your partner regulate their emotions, by being the safe and calm presence. If you’re hoping to interrupt a negative cycle as quickly as possible, co-regulation is going to dramatically increase the odds you’ll be successful.

Co-regulation epitomizes connection. As such, it is probably the best way to interrupt a negative cycle, because what we’re trying to do with this work is replace the negative cycle with a bonding cycle. Here’s an example of co-regulation: Vivian and Nala are in the middle of a heated negative cycle about wedding plans. Vivian tells Nala she’s being selfish. Instead of responding, “No, actually you’re the one being selfish!” like she wants to, Nala stops, takes a deep breath, and says to herself, “Okay, this is it. This is the negative cycle that wants to tear us apart. Our attachment fears are flaring. Neither of us is being their best self so I’m going to take the initiative this time to step up and do something new.” Then Nala reaches for Vivian’s hand, looks her in the eye, and says, “Hey, I love you, let’s take a few breaths together. This is hard. I’m right here.”

Co-regulation can look like taking deep breaths, changing your tone of voice, talking more slowly, or holding someone’s hand. Anything that calms you down, and can create an air of calm in your environment to then calm your partner down, will do the trick.

Another powerful way to co-regulate your partner is to validate whatever is coming up for them. This is especially true of validating anger, which we’ll talk about more in chapter 6. When Vivian accuses Nala of being selfish, instead of getting reactive, Nala might say, “I think what you’re saying is that you feel like your needs don’t matter right now. I get that. Nobody likes feeling like their needs don’t matter. How can I help you know that your needs do matter so we can feel connected and approach this like a team?” In this situation Vivian was fighting to be seen. When Nala was able to show her that she sees her, Vivian deescalated.

With that said, some partners aren’t in the right frame of mind in the heat of the moment to take in validation, and might get annoyed. In that case, it’s better to try simple phrases like “I hear you, I’m here” and/or use soft touch. Sometimes your grounded presence can be the most co-regulating thing you can offer.

Maybe you’re thinking that this all sounds too good to be true. Your internal dialogue might be saying: “That sounds nice for Vivian and Nala, but my partner tries to ‘co-regulate’ me by telling me not to worry about it, or by giving me a hug that feels more like changing the subject.” But these behaviors are not co-regulation, they are attempts at appeasing, and there’s a difference. Co-regulation is motivated by connection, while appeasing is motivated by fear. Co-regulation says, “I want to pull you closer and help you feel safe,” while appeasing says, “I want to tell you what you want to hear or calm you down so this uncomfortable conflict will end.” One is about going toward; the other is about running away.

In the most successful relationships, both partners can co-regulate, but not always at the same time. Nala was able to show up in our example, but Vivian might be the first to show up next time. My greatest hope is that during a negative cycle, at least one partner will be able to pull back, center themselves, and extend the olive branch. But it’s hard to have a thriving relationship if only one partner is always the co-regulator. Still, if that’s happening in your relationship, try not to give up right away. While the goal is that both partners co-regulate more or less equally but at different times, depending on who is more resourced in the moment, sometimes it takes a while to get there, and the best teaching comes from modeling.

An important caveat to co-regulation is that it can only happen if the regulating partner is self-regulated. What I mean by self-regulated is that you can manage your own emotions—you are in control of your feelings, they are not in control of you. It doesn’t mean you cut off your emotions entirely, but that your feelings aren’t in the driver’s seat. Rather, they’re in the passenger seat helping you with directions. In the example above, Nala paused, took a breath, and grounded herself. That was self-regulation, and she was able to pass her “regulated” energy over to Vivian.

Self-regulation starts with awareness. Look inside, get curious, and ask yourself, “What’s going on with me right now?” You might notice, “I’m hearing my partner tell me I’m all wrong and that hurts,” or “My chest is getting really tight, that means I’m triggered,” or “Here comes the abandonment fear,” or “I’m worried he’s seeing me as stupid and broken.”

In order to harness the power of co-regulation to get out of negative cycles and build a strong bond, both you and your partner must be able to self-regulate. There’s no way around it. This doesn’t mean both partners need to do so every time there’s a rupture. If that were the case, we wouldn’t need co-regulation. But we are relational beings. We need each other’s nervous systems to harness the power of connection to others, and we need to be there for our own to harness the power of self-connection. It’s not an either/or; it’s a both/and. I believe healthy relationships are 50/50, but I don’t believe they need to be 50/50 in every given moment. Sometimes one partner will be more upset over something and sometimes one partner will be less tired, hungry, or stressed, and thus be more resourced in the moment. If neither partner can self-regulate during moments when their attachment systems are sounding the alarm bell, there’s nobody to initiate co-regulation and be the comforting presence. Using self-regulation to interrupt a negative cycle doesn’t have to be perfect or make bad feelings go away entirely. It just needs to be good enough to help you do something better. For example, if you’re at a 10 emotionally and you want to throw a plate at the wall, and instead you can get yourself down to a 7 and throw a dish towel, that is better. Better is growth; you can build on better. Maybe next time you can go from a 7 to a 4.

As you think about introducing co-regulation into your relationship, remember that different partners feel soothed in different ways. Some partners like physical touch, some relax with soothing words, others might need something entirely different. Successful couples work together to learn what feels best for each other.

One of the most common questions I receive is “How can I self-regulate?” There are more ways to self-regulate than I can list and what works for one doesn’t necessarily work for others. Common strategies include breathing exercises, meditation, physical exercise, journaling, mentalizing, or “feeling your feelings” (allowing them to pass through your body). Mentalization means stepping back and balancing your view of your partner or the triggering situation. When you’re triggered and feel threatened, it’s all too easy to see the bad in your partner and forget the good. To shift out of this mindset you can mentally visualize a moment when your partner really showed up for you, or a moment when you felt loved and safe. This can signal to your nervous system that there’s less of a threat than what it’s perceiving, which is self-regulating, and can help you manage whatever problem you’re facing with a balanced approach.

Self-regulation starts with awareness, which can be found through practicing mindfulness. Mindfulness is a powerful way to self-regulate and I recommend it as an adjunct to any other strategy you might be using. Sometimes mindfulness is called “body scanning”—it requires stepping back from the situation happening outside of you (what your partner is doing or saying) and into your body. Look inside, get curious, and ask yourself, “What’s going on with me right now?” You might notice, “I’m hearing that my partner doesn’t care about me,” or “here comes the abandonment fear,” or “my shame is saying ‘you must be stupid.’ ” Notice where you might feel tension rising. Focus on the tension without judgment. Notice any other bodily sensations such as your heartbeat, tingling sensations, or a tightening in your stomach. Drop into your five senses by asking yourself, “What can I see? What can I hear? What can I taste? What can I feel with my skin? What can I smell?” Mindfulness is effective because it’s grounding. It takes you out of the overwhelm of all that is going on outside of you, and into the containment of your physical self. A good question to ask when you’re being mindful is “Where are my feet?” which is particularly useful for grounding yourself into the present moment. The very act of being curious about your own experience will help you step back from acting in a way that might not serve you or your relationship. Your curiosity acts like a pause button: “Let me take a beat and look inside before I do or say something I’ll regret.”

When you ask these questions, do it from a place of nonjudgmental observation. Otherwise it won’t work and you’ll feel worse instead of better. Judging yourself for feeling the way you do will only bring on more shame and add to the problem. You can’t fight shame with shame. Next, validate your experience. The importance of validating your experience, whatever it is, cannot be understated because self-validation creates self-acceptance and acceptance is the antidote to shame. Validate your thoughts and feelings which are alive. Here are some examples:

Instead of this self-shaming thought:

“Why can’t I pull it together and get a grip on my thoughts?”

Try this self-validating thought:

“Of course I’m hearing my partner say I’m a bad person. I grew up in a home where I got the message that I was ‘bad’ all the time.”

Instead of this self-shaming thought:

“I shouldn’t be mad, I’m overreacting. I should just let it go.”

Try this self-validating thought:

“It makes sense I’m mad. It’s okay to be mad. I have a right to all of my feelings and all of my feelings have important meanings. I can think about the meanings later but first let me take some breaths.”

This is where it gets tricky, and you might want to protest by asking “but what if my feelings are irrational?” The truth is that all feelings are rational, simply because they exist. If you step on a nail, you know why you feel pain. If you have a random pain in your abdomen, you may not know exactly what’s going on to cause the pain, but yet the pain is real. Your brain creates feelings for a very good reason: to motivate you to take action to protect yourself, or to take action toward fixing a problem or gaining something pleasurable. When your brain is acting out of self-protection, it is either responding to something real in the moment or subconscious memories of past events, or (most likely) a mixture of both. Your perceptions of the situation aren’t always accurate. For example, your partner might not really hate you, but it’s entirely rational to feel scared if you perceive that your partner hates you. Anyone would. When you can validate your experience without shaming yourself, you’re going to feel more self-regulated and be in a much better position to react in a healthy way, assess your perceptions within yourself or by checking it out with your partner, and go forward with problem-solving whatever situation led to the trigger to begin with. If you’re new to self-regulation techniques, my advice is to try different strategies and create your own list of what works for you. For some people that might be any of the ideas listed above, a walk in nature, dancing, rubbing your hands together, or even shaking your body for a few minutes. It’s about dropping down into your body and out of your head—grounding yourself and connecting with yourself in a loving, positive way. Ultimately, you’re giving yourself the same connection you yearn for in your relationship. But the best time to work on building your self-regulation muscle is when you’re not at a 10. Pay attention to small triggers throughout the day: anxiety or annoyance, for example. Use those moments to practice your skills and build habits that your brain can draw upon when the big triggers come.

Here’s a simple breathing exercise called “box breathing.” This type of breathing is a way to tell your nervous system, “We’re safe. All is well.” Inhale for four seconds; hold it for four seconds; exhale for four seconds; hold for four seconds; repeat for a few minutes until you feel your body start to lose the edge.





Name the Negative Cycle


Naming the negative cycle is just that: literally calling it out in the moment to remind you and your partner that something bigger is at play. Naming the negative cycle puts your awareness to use. It reminds your partner and your nervous system that “this is not us, this is something outside of us.” This is called externalization, and you can use it to shift the narrative from “my partner is the enemy” to “the cycle is the enemy.”

Naming the negative cycle might sound like:

“This is our negative cycle. Let’s not let it win.”

“You and this relationship are more important to me than this negative cycle.”

“The negative cycle is our enemy.”



If you’re reading this book on your own and your partner isn’t familiar with the concept of the negative cycle, maybe ask them to read this chapter. Even partners who might not be ready to take a look at their relationship through an attachment lens are often receptive to the idea of the negative cycle because 1) it’s so relatable, and 2) it’s de-shaming. For some ideas on how to bring the topic up with as much safety as possible, see chapter 13.

When you get better at recognizing when you and your partner are in a negative cycle, you may notice that you fall into specific negative cycle traps. Similar to naming the negative cycle, naming the traps is also helpful. “Who’s the Bad Guy?” “Who Gets to Hurt Worse?” and “The Miss.” These “traps” can happen in any type of negative cycle, regardless of the attachment style of each partner or the topic at hand.





Who’s the Bad Guy?


“Who’s the Bad Guy?” is a blame-blame trap in which each partner fixates on what the other partner has done wrong. If you can relate to blame-blame (and most couples can), remember that you’re each fighting to not be the bad guy because your insecurely attached wiring has taught you that being in the wrong makes you wholly bad, which is certain to leave you feeling shamed, misunderstood, invalidated, worthless, incompetent, and devalued. You might think, “If I’m proven to be the bad guy here, that might mean I’m not worthy of getting my own needs met.” Even when a partner is clearly in the wrong, they may fight hard to prove their goodness. In the moment, not being seen as the bad guy can feel like life or death, and for good reason: you’re fighting for your worth as a person and as a partner, because you’ve been taught that bad guys aren’t worthy or lovable. Even if you don’t understand why you play who’s the bad guy, recognizing that you do it is enough if you can learn to get out of it.

To interrupt “Who’s the Bad Guy,” name it: “I think we’re stuck playing ‘Who’s the Bad Guy.’ What if instead we’re both the good guys fighting to reach each other and feel safe?”

Here’s an example. Partner A, an anxious partner, tells Partner B, an avoidant partner, that they don’t like the way Partner B talks to the kids. The delivery is heated and shaming. Partner B says, “You should hear yourself; you’re not exactly Mary Poppins.” Partner A responds with “That’s not true. I have a great relationship with the kids. They talk to me about everything, including the way you talk to them.” Partner B responds with “They talk to you about everything because they know you’ll tell them what they want to hear.” Partner A says, “I was the one who brought it up first. Why can’t you just listen?” Partner B says, “Why should I? I never have any space in this relationship to bring up concerns!” And on and on it goes until finally Partner B says, “Forget it, fine, I’ll do better. I just don’t want to keep going back and forth.”

If this sounds more like two anxious partners, that’s not necessarily the case. Many anxious/avoidant couples get stuck in this sort of blame-blame cycle. It’s just that some avoidant partners will fight harder and/or for longer before eventually withdrawing. Anxious partners, on the other hand, typically feel compelled to keep going until they perceive resolution.





Who Gets to Hurt Worse?


“Who Gets to Hurt Worse?” is similar to “Who’s the Bad Guy?” but in reverse. Partners compete for the role of “most hurt,” because they believe that only one person can hurt at a time. For this couple, being the hurt one is the only way to feel validated for their pain. Of course, in the context of their negative cycle, both partners are suffering with painful unmet attachment needs. Both partners are feeling alone and demoralized and, at worst, the despair of hopelessness. The goal is for you and your partner to move away from the belief that only one of you can be hurting at a time, and move toward the belief that you can both be hurting at once. Validating your partner’s hurt from the negative cycle does not cancel out your own hurt. Attachment pain is not a zero-sum game.

To interrupt “Who Gets to Hurt Worse,” start by naming it: “You know what? We’re acting like only one of us can be hurt over this, but that’s not true. We’re both hurting.”





The Miss


“The Miss” is when a couple gets stuck in a loop of misunderstanding each other’s intentions. Here’s how a miss might play out:

Jayden and Frances find themselves getting stuck in negative cycles around chores. When Jayden feels let down, he often tries to reach Frances (who hasn’t historically been responsive to Jayden’s expressed concerns) with questions that are thinly veiled criticisms. But sometimes his questions are just… questions.

Jayden comes home and asks Frances if she walked the dog. What’s going through his mind is, “It’s a beautiful evening… if she hasn’t walked the dog, we can all go together after dinner.” But Frances has had enough experience with Jayden’s questions to believe there is an underlying criticism. Her nervous system defaults to “Alarm bell, thinly veiled criticism! What he’s saying is ‘I have a feeling you haven’t already walked the dog, in which case you’re irresponsible.’ ”

“What’s that supposed to mean?” Frances responds, clearly getting annoyed.

“I was just asking,” Jayden states. “Can you relax?” Frances feels invalidated because she’s experienced the thinly veiled criticisms many times, so instead of having a nice walk Jayden and Frances get stuck in a negative cycle.

When the Miss happens, name it and get curious: “I think we might be missing each other right now. What are you hearing me say?” When you get to the bottom of your partner’s perception, share your own. When you do this, instead of walking away feeling misunderstood and defeated, which is often the way partners end a Miss, you’ll make it more likely you’ll both feel heard and connected.





Take a Break


In a perfect world, during a heated negative cycle one partner has the capacity to take a pause, self-regulate, and provide the co-regulating energy to both. Like I said, focusing on connection is the best way out of negative cycles, considering that negative cycles are defined by disconnection. But it’s also the most advanced and some couples aren’t ready for that when they’re new to this work. For one, you or your partner might still be learning how to ground yourself and self-regulate in heated moments. Also, being the co-regulator is vulnerable and risky—what if I get rejected?—and it can take time to build up to. So what can we do in the meantime?

When you’re in a negative cycle and really don’t know how to get out, agreeing to take a break might make the best sense. The idea of disconnecting might sound counterproductive after you’ve read so much about the importance of connection, but taking a break during a negative cycle is the kind of interruption that is meant to protect the relationship. Breaks will help both partners find some space to reorganize themselves around their inner experiences and attachment fears. Breaks give you the opportunity to come up for air, which is especially important for avoidant partners, who often do better facing their feelings in “chunks” instead of all at once.

But breaks aren’t meant to be indefinite or open-ended. Agreeing to come back to the conversation is part of the process. If you don’t agree to come back to it, that’s not a break; that’s pushing a hard topic under the rug. In terms of the length of your break, I recommend anywhere from five minutes to one day. Any shorter and you haven’t had proper time to catch your breath; any longer and the topic feels too distant. This is a general guideline. Sometimes it will make more sense to table a topic for longer.

Taking a break has to be a team effort. It requires vulnerability on the part of each partner. If you have an anxious attachment, breaks can feel scary and painful. In your mind, it’s better to keep fighting or arguing because maybe, just maybe, if the two of you keep at it, you’ll finally find the resolution and closeness you’re needing. If you stop, then what? You’ll have to feel unresolved and sit with uncomfortable abandonment fears.

Breaks usually aren’t hard for those with an avoidant attachment. Generally speaking, if you’re avoidantly attached, you welcome the space. In your mind, breaks keep things from getting worse. But breaks shouldn’t be a means to distract yourself indefinitely. For you, the work is agreeing to reengage. To help your partner tolerate the break, it can be enormously helpful to say, “Don’t worry, we’ll come back to it,” and agree to when, if you’re able to do that.

When you need to take a break, you’ll have the most success if you use attachment-friendly language. Frame the break not as “you’re bad and I have to protect myself from you” but as “our relationship is something to be valued and protected.” Here are some phrases to try:

“The negative cycle is the enemy right now. Let’s take a break so it doesn’t win.”

“This path is going to get us nowhere. How about we take a five-minute break?”

“We’re in our negative cycle; let’s not do this.”

“I love you more than I love this argument.”

“This relationship is too important to me to keep going down this road to nowhere.”

“If we don’t take a break, I’m afraid we’re going to end up really hurting each other.”

“I don’t want a break from you. I want a break from how overwhelmed I feel.”



If you and your partner successfully interrupt your negative cycle and take a break, know that that alone is a huge success. But now what? If you have an anxious attachment, it’s almost certain you feel worse. Your nervous system isn’t saying, “I’m so glad we took a break and have this space to process our thoughts and feelings so we can come back together and work this out.” It’s probably crying, “I’m so mad, sad, and scared, and at least if we’d stayed in the cycle I wouldn’t have to be alone with it! At least I might get the answers I’m looking for! At least we might eventually find our ways back to each other! Now I’m supposed to just sit here burning up inside?”

It’s hard; it hurts. For some people, this can be the hardest thing they have to do in life: face their attachment fears and shame. So what should you do? To start, you don’t have to be alone with it. This might be a good time to call a trusted loved one and seek support. That doesn’t mean you have to share private details you’d rather keep to yourself, but you can say, “Ari and I had an argument and are taking a break for a couple of hours so we can cool down. I’m having a hard time.”

In times when no outside source of help is available, you can try journaling your thoughts and feelings, exercising, breathing exercises, getting into nature, listening to your favorite music, and anything else that might help you ease your nervous system back into a state of regulation. Remember, getting good at feeling your feelings is the path to developing a secure attachment in your relationship with yourself. Learning to take care of you is taking care of the relationship.

What if you’re the avoidant partner? You might be drawn to distracting yourself or trying to forget about the situation, but the space during the break doesn’t let you off the hook. This is your time to dive in and figure out what it is you’re feeling. Not just thinking but feeling. When you go back to the situation, my hope is that you go back in with your whole self: a balance of your head and heart. For you, it’s less about self-regulation and more about self-engagement. This is the time to tap into yourself and ask questions like “What did I notice in my body: Chest tightening? Pressure in my head? Tingling in my limbs? Jaw clenching? Hands clenching? Deflated feeling? Throat tightening? Anything else?” I’ve worked with countless partners with avoidant attachment who need weeks of practice before they’re able to recognize a bodily sensation, so if you’re having trouble with this, you’re not alone. If you hadn’t learned to disconnect from your body, you wouldn’t have an avoidant attachment to begin with. I encourage you to put the time into practicing body scanning. It’s the first step to understanding your inner world. Once you’ve been able to locate a physical sensation, ask yourself, “If this sensation had a feeling name, what might it be?” For example, you might call a tightening in your throat “sadness,” or a clenching in your jaw “frustration”; a frozen feeling might be “caught off guard.”

Connect your feelings with the urge to react. For example, “When I felt this anger, my urge was to defend myself. What did my partner say or do just before I felt the urge to get defensive? What meaning did I make of what was said? Why did I need to get defensive? What was I trying to protect… my sense of self? The relationship? Some of both?” If you’re able to get your own journal out to help you along, even better. Your partner is going to feel safer and closer if you go back in with more clarity around your emotional and vulnerable self.





Asking for (and Giving) Reassurance


Since negative cycles are driven by attachment fears and shame, asking for reassurance is a quick way to calm fears and de-shame if your relationship is ready for it. If you’re in the middle of a negative cycle and things are escalating, take a pause and ask yourself, “What am I afraid of right now?” or “What am I ashamed of right now?” Then ask for the reassurance you need to not feel scared or ashamed.

Here’s an example: Camila and Charlie are going back and forth about her concerns regarding an upcoming vacation. Camila is blaming Charlie for not caring and Charlie is telling her she’s crazy, of course he cares. Camila realizes it’s the cycle and checks in with herself and realizes she’s afraid that if she tells Charlie about her concerns in a way that isn’t blaming and accusatory, she won’t be heard. Instead of continuing down the same old path, she gets vulnerable, saying, “You know what? Right now we’re in our loop of doom [sometimes couples give their negative cycles names] and what’s happening for me is that I’m afraid if I don’t get big and start blaming you and accusing you, I won’t be heard. Can I just get some reassurance that if I shift gears and try this in a new way, you’ll be able to hear me?”

You can also offer your partner reassurance even if they don’t ask for it. Each of you has the opportunity to shift gears and try something different. Maybe Charlie could’ve been the one to step back and say, “I think you might be afraid I’m not going to hear you. Can I just reassure you right now that if you can get softer, I will still be able to hear you? Can we try this a new way?”

Or Camila might say, “Charlie, if you’re worried that my concerns mean I think you’re a bad partner I understand that. I know things have happened between us in the past that makes it easy for you to see it that way. But for me that’s not what’s happening right now. I see you as a good partner. I have something I want to talk about, that’s true, but nothing I have to say can take away from how much I appreciate you and love you.”

For some couples, asking for reassurance and responding to a partner’s bids for reassurance is too much if they’re early in this work, are more sensitive to triggers, can’t trust reassurance, and/or are having highly escalated cycles. When it works, it’s powerful, but if you try it and it falls flat, don’t despair. It’s not uncommon. Asking for something is a big risk and even providing reassurance can feel risky. If it doesn’t go well, this simply means we need to do some work in the background to build up safety, trust, and the self-regulation/co-regulation skills required to manage the situation when things don’t go as planned.

Practice is the best way to build up these skills to help you interrupt your negative cycle. Be gentle with yourself. It takes a leap of faith—in yourself most of all—to change the way you respond. Remember, how you both have been reacting is making you feel farther apart than bringing the closeness you desire. You can change your reaction and underlying assumptions, and it can start with these steps.

But it’s also helpful to keep in mind that interrupting the negative cycle is really about triage. You don’t want to get stuck in negative cycles as you try to improve the overall climate of your relationship, because as you build the overall climate to increase security and closeness, negative cycles will begin to decrease on their own. It all feeds on itself. We’re working this from every angle. With that, let’s learn how to build an attachment-friendly climate.





CHAPTER 6 Preventing the Negative Cycle

The Attachment-Friendly Environment




If you can learn how to ward off the negative cycle, well, it’s like preventative medicine. As you get better at identifying the negative cycle and course-correcting in the moment, you will hopefully build up to a place where you can prevent it from getting started in the first place. To do this, we need to create what’s called an attachment-friendly environment.

An attachment-friendly environment is one in which partners have met attachment needs, meaning that in the overall climate of the relationship they each feel valued, seen, understood, and appreciated. In an attachment-friendly environment, partners view each other through an “attachment lens”—meaning, for example, that when your partner gets snarky, you’re able to hear it as “you’re trying to communicate to me how much pain you’re in,” rather than hearing blame and shame and the message that “you are the enemy, you are bad, you are trying to hurt me.” These environments are more resilient to negative cycles because behaviors such as criticism, cynicism, stonewalling, defensiveness, and accusations are replaced with curiosity, empathy, understanding, and validation. You can use specific skills to create an attachment-friendly environment—and I’ll dive into these skills in this chapter—but for relationship change to last, these skills need to be part of a broader mindset to care for the security of the relationship. For example, later in this chapter we’ll discuss emotional validation, so that when you say something like, “I hear that you’re sad,” it’s not just empty words; instead the spirit behind the words is “I want my partner to feel seen and accepted for their emotional self right now, because we all thrive when we feel seen. I’m not just speaking the words because a book told me it’s a healthy way to communicate. I’m speaking them because they mean something much bigger about the relationship I want to cultivate.” To cultivate an attachment-friendly environment, you’re aiming to create a felt sense of empathy that drives the words: “I hear that you’re sad.”

Think of it this way: In the movies, the best actors don’t just memorize their lines. They spend weeks or months embodying their characters, even becoming their characters. When the time comes to read their lines, they can show up authentically, because they understand where their character is coming from—they understand the character’s motivations, insecurities, and fears. This is what I want for you. I don’t want you to just say or do the “right” thing to create an attachment-friendly environment. I want you to understand the why so that you can show up authentically in your relationship. My hope is that you will believe in the principles behind the strategies, and embody the spirit of this work, so that in the end you don’t even need the scripts.

As we proceed and you learn how to create an attachment-friendly environment, keep in mind that your relationship with your partner is made up of repeated interactions between the two of you, day in and day out, and each of these interactions provides the opportunity to do something profound: to leave each other feeling seen, heard, cared for, and validated. When you learn how to make the most of each interaction, and do it consistently, you will have a healthy relationship.

One note: In a perfect world, creating an attachment-friendly environment is the responsibility of both partners. When I work with couples, I encourage both individuals to practice the skills laid out in this chapter. That’s not to say one partner won’t grow faster than the other, or that they’ll end up at the exact same place. Be patient. My husband will never be as emotionally aware as I am—I’m a therapist who has more time to practice these skills than most people. It’s literally my job. But still, my husband is emotionally aware enough to give me what I need. That said, you can only control yourself, and it only takes one partner to initiate the relationship change that can lead to a better environment. That doesn’t mean staying in a one-sided relationship indefinitely, but for real and lasting change, your work needs to come from a place of “I want to be different even when you can’t be.” Our own growth needs to be our priority.

Of course we all want our partners to change and grow if we’re repeatedly getting stuck in negative cycles. Except we can’t want it more than anything else. We have to want our own growth more than anything else, because that’s the mindset from which real relationship change can take place.





Communicating in an Attachment-Friendly Environment


Imagine a busy restaurant with three tables where couples are sitting.

The first couple sounds like this:

Partner A: Wow, this menu is overwhelming. I don’t remember it being this big.

Partner B: Why did you want to come here then? You knew how big the menu is; it was your choice.

Partner A: Why are you getting so defensive? All I said was it’s hard to decide.

Partner B: I’m not getting defensive. I’m stating a fact.

Partner A: You’re being kind of snarky about it.

Partner B: I don’t want to get pulled into an argument right now. Let’s just eat.



The next couple sounds like this:

Partner A: Wow, this menu is overwhelming.

Partner B: I hear that you think the menu is overwhelming. When you say “the menu is so big,” I feel blamed for making a bad decision.

Partner A: That’s your stuff. I feel sad that you are misunderstanding me.

Partner B: I feel like you’re getting dysregulated, and this is a boundary violation. My therapist said when this happens, I need to take a break and go sit in the lobby until you can self-regulate.

Partner A: I hear that you think your boundaries are being violated. I feel like your narcissism is making me feel abandoned. My therapist says you need to co-regulate me.



The final couple sounds like this:

Partner A: Wow, this menu is overwhelming. I don’t remember it being this big.

Partner B: I thought you already knew that before we came. We could’ve gone somewhere else.

Partner A: (picks up a feeling of being misunderstood by the comment, pauses to check in with self, recognizes the potential for a negative cycle, responds with attachment in mind) I can see why you would think I’m complaining, but I’m not. I really like it here, big menu and all. Anyway, I’m just glad we’re together.

Partner B: (feels reassured) Me, too.



Later:

Partner B: Remember at dinner when you mentioned the menu being overwhelming? That was one of those moments when I told myself a story that you were blaming me for getting it wrong, and I felt the urge to get defensive. I appreciate that you were able to respond the way you did.

Partner A: I understand that and I appreciate you bringing it up. Look how far we’ve come. In the past that conversation could’ve really derailed us.



While none of these conversations are entirely realistic, they represent three different approaches to the same problem. In the first example, the couple is having obvious conflict; in the second, the couple is having stealth conflict. Though the words might seem “psychologically sound,” conflict is conflict. The third has all the elements of an attachment-friendly environment (though you can certainly have this environment without such exaggerated language). This couple managed a trigger without going into a negative cycle like the other two couples. Partner A was able to check in and redirect. They had the attachment savvy to respond without getting pulled into an argument of details. Judging by how they managed it, these two have had enough conversations about triggers to know what each other might be needing. Are they mind readers? No. Rather, they’ve worked at understanding each other on a deep level, including understanding the insecure parts we all have somewhere inside of ourselves that sometimes need special care. Could partner B have done something differently? Yes, but that’s not how it played out here. In another situation partner B might have been the one to catch the negative cycle and change course.

Another important note is that these partners were able to put the trigger aside, enjoy each other, and talk about it later in private. In another situation it might have made sense to talk about it right then and there, but they trusted it could be addressed later without it being ignored indefinitely. And in yet another situation they may not have needed to bring it up again at all. Each situation is unique.

This example shows you what you probably already know: how quickly things can go south. In this case it all started because of a menu. Over and over, couples tell me at the beginning of therapy that “we fight over the smallest things.”

“Nope,” I say, “you’re fighting over something that can feel like life and death in the moment—attachment safety. The content might be inconsequential, but the meaning is powerful. Nothing is small when it comes to attachment.”





Attachment Intentions and the Attachment Lens


Attachment theory rests upon the belief that all relationship behaviors have an attachment intention. Every time we snap, defend, shut down, push away, get cynical, sarcastic, use passive-aggressive humor, or call names, it is a misguided attempt to say, “Hear me! Feel some of my pain so you know how much this hurts! Stop treating me like this! See what you’re doing wrong so you’ll change! See me as good!” And, when distilled further, “I need to feel safe right now!”

Let’s say you’ve tried repeatedly to get your partner to weigh in on whether the two of you should travel to your college friend’s wedding. Your partner keeps dodging the issue and you’re left in the dark. Based on my experience, the odds are high that the attachment intention is that your partner is conflicted between anxiety about the trip and anxiety about the relationship. Maybe you’re trying to save for an upcoming move, so spending money on travel right now makes your partner uncomfortable. That’s a reasonable concern, but maybe they don’t want to express this to you because they’re afraid they’ll feel like a failure if they let you down. Their fear might be based on real experience with you in the past, previous relationships, and/or their childhood attachment climate. Regardless, your partner’s reluctance to discuss the topic has the attachment intention of staying safe with you. If they didn’t care about staying safe with you, they’d probably just say “no” to the wedding and leave it at that.

Consider this other example: You’re irritated that your partner doesn’t tidy up the bathroom after getting ready in the morning, even though you’ve repeatedly asked them to. When your partner mentions one afternoon that you forgot to close the garage door after getting home from work, you retort, “You’re far from perfect—what about how you leave the bathroom every morning?” If your frustration had words, it would say, “This doesn’t feel fair and I need to know things are fair between us—that both our needs matter equally—to feel safe and close!”

What about big behaviors, like affairs? What’s the attachment intention there? We all know affairs destroy attachment, but we also probably know that we all need to feel wanted, accepted, and loved. Our earth is populated by eight billion people walking around hoping to feel this way. When someone isn’t getting those needs met, they’ll do any number of things to find what they’re looking for, including going outside the relationship. I’m not excusing affairs—I know the devastation they create, and I know there’s a much better way to go about getting one’s needs met—but even these destructive choices have attachment intentions.

Keep in mind that positive relationship behaviors have attachment intentions, too. You make your partner’s grandma’s lasagna recipe because you know they love it. Their happiness contributes to your own happiness and feelings of security. Part of why you keep your living space neat is because it helps you feel relaxed, and feeling relaxed is not only good for you as an individual, but it also helps you enjoy time with your partner when you’re together. You work hard at your job to feel a sense of inner accomplishment, but also so you and your partner can be happy and have a good life together. You say “I love you” every day when you part because you want your partner to feel safe and loved.

If you can look at your negative cycle and see the attachment intention underneath the surface conflict, you can start to shift your viewpoint, seeing the situation through an attachment lens. This is very different from what I call the “enemy lens,” which is how many partners with insecure attachments view their conflicts—and thus their partner. The enemy lens says, “When my partner says and does things I don’t like it’s because they’re bad, or because they don’t love me, or because they want to hurt or shame me.” Most of the time, of course, this isn’t the case. Ironically, most of the time when your partner says and does things you don’t like, they’re trying to protect their attachment. Viewing yourself and your partner through an attachment lens, especially in your darkest moments when the most hurtful words and behaviors are flying, is a game changer. It’s also critical to establish an attachment-friendly environment.

Adopting an attachment lens is a work in progress. Even as a couples therapist and after twenty-three years of marriage, I still have to remember to reground myself into my attachment lens when there’s tension between my partner and me. Nobody is entirely exempt from taking things personally, especially in close relationships where the emotional stakes are the highest. When my husband is in a bad mood, my first instinct might be to think, “You have no right to be grumpy,” as if he’s contractually obliged to be happy all the time. In this case, my own attachment fears have kicked in: I feel so alone! What if he stays grumpy forever and never comes back? Will we ever feel connected again? Or it might be about my own view of myself as unworthy: If he doesn’t care about my needs right now, what might that mean about how much I matter in this relationship? If I don’t matter, what does that mean about me? Does that mean I’m worthless? But the more I do this work, the easier it is to pull back, look through my attachment lens, and reassure myself, “This is about my attachment fears. Let’s take a step back and do this differently.”





Clearing Out Shame


When I first start seeing a couple, usually each partner is focused on what the other is doing wrong. Such as:

“I tried to tell her I was sad that she didn’t support me when our son was being rude. Instead of validating me, she just tried to explain why my way is wrong.”

“I do everything I can to be supportive, but it’s never enough. I’ll never be enough for him.”

“She never sees my side of things. Everything has to be her way or else it’s a fight. If I try to talk about my side, she gets more upset and we end up talking only about her issues.”

“If I bring something up, like how he’s always on his phone, he just denies it and blames me for bringing it up, like my concerns aren’t real and I’m just trying to pick a fight.”

What is the common ground here? Are the protesting partners all bad, uncaring, and self-absorbed? Are the partners on the receiving end unsupportive, overbearing, and unaccountable? Maybe some of their behaviors can be described as such, but when viewed through the lens of attachment, each of these “misbehaving” partners is communicating with the same primary goal in mind. Subconsciously, they’re trying to stay one step ahead of the shame living inside them… the shame that is driving their insecure attachment and leaving them in fear of abandonment and feelings of rejection and unworthiness.

Shame develops during childhood when caregivers send messages, consistently and over the course of time, that some or all of you is bad, weak, selfish, or some other “shameful” descriptor. This might sound extreme, but it doesn’t have to be. In fact many decent, loving parents unintentionally shame their children when they’re angry or as a means to solve problems. Let’s look at an example of how shaming messages, when repeated over time, can lead to bigger problems.

Ten-year-old Peyton asks for a puppy and, like all ten-year-olds, promises to take care of it. But when Peyton makes the request, her dad is indignant. “Why do you think we’d trust you with a dog?” he responds. “You can’t even manage to keep your own room clean.” It’s not a horrible thing to say, and all parents can relate to this frustration. But the underlying message Peyton hears is “You should be able to keep your room clean and since you can’t that must mean something is fundamentally wrong with you.” On top of that, the delivery is not loving and solution-focused; it’s cynical. Peyton takes on the self-beliefs that “I’m not good enough because I can’t get it right,” “I’m not deserving of being spoken to gently,” and “Expressing frustration and shaming others is how to work on problems.”

This shame-based response can show up in Peyton’s life all the way into adulthood. She might become an overly stressed overachiever as a way to hide the parts of her she doesn’t believe are good enough. This could be her way of avoiding rejection and maintaining a sense of being worthy of connection. She might try to hide her insecurities by being mean to other girls at school, the subconscious idea being that if others feel weak and unworthy, she won’t have to. Instead of learning how to express her frustrations in a healthy way, she might hide them underneath cynicism just as she saw her dad do.

Let’s contrast this with an alternative response: “I’m concerned about a dog being too much responsibility for you. Right now you’re at the age when you’re learning how to get better at taking care of the basic things like your room. Let’s focus on that for a while before adding something else to your plate.” This response achieves the same “no” for Peyton’s dad, but suggests growth. It tells Peyton that her father believes she’ll be able to handle these responsibilities one day. That she is good enough, and deserves to be spoken to with respect.

When children pick up shaming messages they learn to hide parts of themselves they believe are bad or unworthy. Humans are driven to connect, so it only makes sense that you’re going to hide the parts of you that you believe aren’t worthy of connection.

But it doesn’t have to stay that way. There’s a lot you can do to create your own low-shame microenvironment in the safe confines of your relationships with your loved ones. The antidote to shame is acceptance, and the hopeful news is that when you view your partner through the lens of attachment you can accept them without accepting all of their behavior, and they can do so for you. By separating the behavior from the person, shame will, over time, begin to dissolve. When Shonna chronically breaks her promises, instead of her partner Ariana saying “You’re irresponsible and selfish,” she can say, “I understand how much you have going on and how easy it is for you to overcommit right now. At the same time when you say one thing and do another, I feel left in the dark. I need to know your words mean something. What can we do here?”

When Shonna reflects on her behavior, shaming herself, “I’m so bad, why can’t I get it right?” it’s only going to bog her down with negative, unproductive energy. But healthy guilt, on the other hand, which might look like thinking “I’m a good person and a good partner, but I’m letting Ariana down when I break promises; this is something I need to work on,” is going to be a much healthier way to motivate herself to make changes without making her want to hide away and avoid connection.

Let’s say your partner seems resistant to change when you’ve tried bringing up your relationship struggles. So now, when you recommend a relationship book you’ve been reading, they push it away and say, “We don’t need that, we just need to be nicer to each other.” In my experience, what this partner is really doing is rejecting their own shame, saying, “It’s too unbearable to think I can’t do this on my own. Normal people make their relationship work; they don’t need help from books.” Again, shame is saying, “If I can’t figure it out on my own, I am all wrong, broken, or unworthy.” Push away the book, push away what the book represents: shame.

People with insecure attachments are walking around the world trying to keep the idea that they are bad or unworthy at their core—their shame—at bay. This requires them to engage in all sorts of ineffective communication patterns and behaviors to keep a lid on the shame they so fear being exposed.

Here are some examples of how shame shows up in relationships:

Overreacting: Shame says, “I carry a self-belief of unworthiness, so anything that comes along to confirm what I already fear to be true is going to overwhelm me with the painful shame in me. When that happens, I have to get as big as possible to fight it away.”

Blaming and Defensiveness: Shame says, “It’s too painful to own my flaws. People who mess up are unworthy. So I have to convince you that you’re wrong and then I don’t have to be the bad one. If I’m not the bad one, you won’t see me as unworthy.”

Rigidity: Shame says, “I can’t be open to your ideas about parenting, there’s too much on the line. If I mess up as a parent, what does that mean about me? I’m too afraid to mess this up and let down my family and feel like a failure. I need for you to see that I’m in pain, too, but I don’t have awareness or words for it. Your parenting ideas feel like a threat to my safety, so I have to shut them out.”

Withdrawal: Shame says, “I don’t know what to do to make this better right now and if I can’t fix it, I’m a letdown. I feel so powerless. I’d rather go hide than stand here feeling defeated and broken.”

Criticism: Shame says, “I’m telling you exactly what I need, but you won’t do it. You must not love me. Am I worthless to you? Feeling worthless is too painful; at least if I keep telling you what you’re doing wrong, maybe you’ll finally hear me, and I’ll know I’m valuable.”

Not only does shame block communication and resolution of problems, but it also blocks connection. When people carry shame, they want to hide themselves. They say, “I can’t get too close. I can’t be seen. It’s not safe. All these bad parts of me are shameful and so I have to hide them. If I don’t hide them, I’ll be rejected.” People who have insecure attachments are so mired with shame that they end up hiding so much of themselves they have very little authenticity left to connect with.

You can do a lot to get the ball rolling to create a shame-proof relationship. Dissolving shame isn’t a quick fix, but when you begin to use the strategies in this chapter authentically and consistently, shame in your life—both for yourself and in your relationship—will diminish. When you spill a green smoothie all over your light carpet, you can say to yourself, “Well… I’m rushing around a bit. Good for me to notice I need to take a breath and pull back,” instead of “I’m so angry with myself! I can’t even manage the simplest things. Why can’t I be like other people and hold it all together?” When you give this gift to yourself it’s much easier to show up gently for your partner or other loved ones when they drop the ball.

Shame is minimized through safe communication. First, keep your attachment lens on. Shame interprets your partner’s behavior as “You’re bad and wrong for what you did,” while the attachment lens comes in and says, “I don’t like what you did, but I can see that was your way of staying protected from something you didn’t want to feel. Let’s talk about it so maybe it will play out differently next time.”

Let’s say your partner is trying to get you to open up more about your relationship with your parents. They say, “You never talk about your relationship with your family and I don’t get it. You must have feelings about them. Why won’t you share with me?”

You respond with: “There’s nothing to open up about. They’re my parents, that’s all. Why are you always pressuring me and trying to create problems that don’t exist?”

This touched your shame, setting off alarm bells in your nervous system. What’s happening underneath could be “I don’t know how to talk about feelings, and my relationship with my parents is complicated but I don’t want to be seen as a bad partner for not being able to open up, so the best I can do is turn it back on you and call you the problem so I don’t have to be the shameful, unworthy problem.”

But by pushing your partner away, you’re sending the message that there’s something wrong with them for wanting to know you. That their desire to connect is too much. That they’re too much.

How might this situation play out in a nonshaming way?

Your partner is asking to know more about your relationship with your parents. You have the urge to get reactive but instead you look through your attachment lens. You can see that your partner isn’t trying to be invasive. They want to connect with you and they want to know they’re valuable enough to you to be let in.

Now from this softer place you might say something like “I understand you feel left out. It’s not that I don’t want to share with you. It’s that I don’t have the words.”

An important caveat: nobody can make someone else’s shame go away. What we can do is help, by doing our part to create a shame-free environment.

Moving out of the shame cloud is harder for some of us than others. It starts with a focus on connection, which is infinitely easier when you’re able to look through the attachment lens. Shame says, “I’m not worthy of connection,” so when communication is centered on connection, the message is just the opposite: “You are worthy of connection and that means you aren’t shameful.” Let’s say your partner is staring at their phone instead of talking to you. How can you tell your partner you want them off the phone without shaming them (“you’re always staring at that screen!”)? Focus on connection first. Ask yourself, “How can I create an invitation instead of an accusation?” Then try, “I enjoy talking to you. Do you think you can finish up and put your phone away so we can chat?”





Creating the Attachment-Friendly Environment: EVVICT Shame


The following strategies are all intended to help you establish an attachment-friendly environment in your relationship by “EVVICT-ing shame”: Empathy, Validation, Vulnerability, Influence, Curiosity, and Tolerance. Keep in mind that while they are described separately, all these skills work together. The better you get at one, the easier the others will be. Before we jump into learning how to EVVICT shame, let’s revisit the idea of self-regulation, without which none of these strategies will be possible.





Self-Regulation


When it comes to personal and relationship healing and growth, self-regulation is paramount. When partners don’t work on self-regulation, the environment they create is reactive, which is not attachment-friendly. And reactiveness is not easy to overcome (but very possible). A trigger is called a trigger because it tells your nervous system to take action or freeze. In a triggered moment your nervous system believes that you are under threat and in danger. Remember, attachment threat is an existential death fear. Your nervous system’s “keep us alive at all costs” logic means the priority becomes survival. You aren’t supposed to pause and think through a situation when you’re under threat; you’re driven by instinct. This is why triggers feel so powerful. They are meant to be heard and obeyed, no questions asked. This is why overreaction is so easy.

But only in the most extreme situations do we completely lose ourselves into sheer panic when triggered. Most of the time we still have some, even if only a little, capacity to ground ourselves—or in other words, to self-regulate. As we discussed in chapter 5, ways to self-regulate include taking deep breaths (deep breaths with slow exhales signal safety to your nervous system), journaling, using mentalization and mindfulness, and/or saying soothing phrases to yourself like “I’m safe. I’ve got this.” This is how self-regulation works—it gets you out of a place of reactiveness so that you have more control over what you say or do.





Consider the Four Fs


Marriage and Family Therapist Pete Walker, in his book Complex PTSD: From Surviving to Thriving, has what I’ve found to be a useful take on how we respond to triggers: Fight, Flight, Freeze, or Fawn. Most partners have a go-to response when triggered in their negative cycles, which usually corresponds to one of these four F types.

Some partners are more likely to fight: criticize, accuse, judge, attack, get defensive, or do something with the intention of aggressively changing a situation. Others are more likely to respond to triggers with flight: avoiding the topic or getting out of the situation as quickly as possible so they don’t have to feel overwhelmed. Some are more likely to freeze: go numb, shut down, or go blank. Still others are more likely to fawn: appease (say what their partner wants to hear without really meaning it), people-please, or offer praise, compliments, or anything else to say “I’m safe!” for the sake of safety but at the expense of authenticity or healthy self-interest.

According to Walker, some people go back and forth between opposite extremes: if fawning doesn’t work, they flip to fight (or vice versa); if flight doesn’t work, they flip to freeze (or vice versa).

The concept of the four F types has been talked about extensively in the world of psychology, but Walker takes it a step further and offers helpful tips for how you can manage your predominant F type(s) (your predominant F type is the one you’re most likely to employ when you feel threatened). To start, each F type operates on a spectrum—there’s a healthy version and an unhealthy version of each type. Take “fight.” On one end of the fight spectrum is the aggressive version, but on the other end is a healthy assertion. The same is true for the other F types:

The healthy version of fight is assertion.

The healthy version of flight is removing yourself from an unsafe situation.

The healthy version of freeze is to take a pause and consider your next move before overreacting.

The healthy version of fawn is to defuse a situation with calm and/or kindness.



Reflect on your negative cycles. How are you most likely to respond to being triggered by your partner? In other words, what are your one or two predominant F types?

Once you’ve figured this out, identify the healthy version of the opposite F type—again, fight and flight are opposites, so are freeze and fawn—and try to do that instead. Here are some examples of how this strategy can play out in your negative cycle:

When your partner tells you they’re bothered that you forgot about their work holiday party and then acted surprised when they reminded you, your urge is to get defensive, which is a fight response: “You probably told me when I was half-asleep. Why didn’t you text me? You know I won’t remember things unless you text them.” For you, the opposite is a healthy version of fawn, which might sound like an authentic validation of their feelings before going further: “Honey, I’m sorry. I know that’s super frustrating, especially considering how important this event is to you. I’m going to get it sorted out.”

What about if you’re already a fawner, and your partner says, “You can’t remember anything! It’s so annoying; it’s like you’re always stuck in your own world,” your go-to might be somewhat frantic, “You’re right, I’m just an idiot… I can’t believe I forgot. You’re so wonderful to want me there with you, and here I am dropping the ball.” In that case, you might need to adopt the healthy version of fight, which is assertiveness: “Okay, I hear you and I know it’s frustrating when I forget. But can you please say that to me more kindly because it’s hard for me to hear you when it comes at me like that.”

What if you’re the one trying to bring up the concern and your partner comes in hot, saying, “I wouldn’t forget things if you thought about me every now and then.” Your urge might be flight: “Never mind, you’re right, I shouldn’t have brought it up,” and disengage. For you, it might be useful to try the healthy version of freeze: taking a pause before immediately giving in to your urge to back down, and giving yourself a second to respond.

Last, if your urge is to freeze, you might consider doing the healthy version of flight, which is to remove yourself from the situation. Take a break, with the intention of coming back to it in the near future.

Now that we’ve reviewed the importance of self-regulation, let’s move forward with EVVICT-ing shame from your relationship.





Empathy


Empathy is created when you allow yourself to feel some of what your partner is feeling, particularly their vulnerable emotions such as fear, anger, grief, shame, and even joy (doesn’t it feel good when someone laughs with you?). This will elicit compassion, and you are far more likely to be responsive to your partner’s reaches for help, comfort, and connection when you come from a place of compassion.

For many people, empathy is there but it gets buried. Sometimes people think they’re being empathic when really what they’re being is anxious, or rather their empathy gets intertwined with anxiety. You can tell the difference because when you’re being empathic you’re meeting the other person where they are… holding their hand (metaphorically or otherwise) as they experience pain. When you’re overcome with your own anxiety about their pain, you’ll try to move them away from their pain as a way to soothe your own anxiety but in a way that leaves them alone. Another way to tell is if you’re wholly giving up your own self-care or needs in an attempt to rescue your partner from their feelings. Of course nobody likes seeing their partner suffer and sometimes there is appropriate action to take to help. But often there’s not. Some problems can’t be solved and we just need to show up and be with them. It’s not always black or white, either/or, but it’s something to be mindful of. Research shows that when a partner brings a nonrelationship-related problem to their anxious partner, the anxious partner often reacts in a way that leaves their partner feeling worse, not better, and that’s certainly not the goal. Let’s say your partner had a bad day at work and they come home feeling down. An anxious response is a frantic-flavored “What’s wrong? Why are you upset? What happened? Are you going to lose your job!?” An empathic response is an authentically delivered “I’m so sorry you’re feeling down, do you want to tell me about it?”

For others, difficulty accessing their empathy stems from never learning how to tap into their own feelings (you can’t understand someone else’s feelings if you’ve never even investigated your own) or because they’ve been so stuck trying to protect themselves from the painful feelings of their insecure attachment that they can’t possibly step out of themselves. Partners with avoidant attachment often fall into this category and have a tendency to respond to their partner’s distress with a lack of visible emotion, from a place of heady problem-solving, or indifference, none of which fall under the rubric of “empathic emotional presence.” This does not mean those with avoidant attachment lack empathy; it’s just that it can be hard to see. The good news, however, is that accessing and communicating empathy is a learned skill. As avoidant partners learn to emotionally reengage with themselves, empathy only gets easier for them to share.

When you and your partner are in touch with your own emotional experiences, while also open to each other’s emotional experiences, you are emotionally present with each other. You can feel each other, but without losing yourselves. Sometimes it can be helpful when your partner is upset to visualize one foot in your partner’s experience and one foot grounded in your own experience. This might feel like “I’m mad at my partner for saying mean things, but I can also feel how desperate they are to be heard.” You aren’t losing your own anger, which will help you problem-solve and set healthy boundaries when the time comes, but you can also feel your partner’s vulnerability, which will help you problem-solve and set those boundaries from a place of love. This might look like saying, “I love you and I can see how painful it is for you when you feel unheard. At the same time, the things you’re saying to me are really hurtful and this has to change. It’s not good for either of us.”

Empathy can be regulating during conflict, because feeling your partner’s pain will tell your nervous system, “My partner is safe” instead of “My partner is a threat.” That said, it does require some self-regulation to allow empathy in. You have to get yourself settled enough inside, and then the empathy will settle you even more. And remember, everything you do will impact your partner’s experience and behavior, so empathy can get you and your partner into a loop of connection instead of a negative cycle.





Validate


Between my second and third children I experienced a miscarriage. I found out very early on, at eight weeks, meaning I had only known I was pregnant for four weeks. Still, I was devastated. Many well-meaning people in my life comforted me by telling me it was meant to be, that at least I wasn’t further along in the pregnancy, and that luckily I had two other children to be grateful for, all of which were true. My husband was there for me, of course, as he always is, but he wasn’t affected in the same way I was and couldn’t relate to my pain. I understand that and feel nothing but appreciation for the people in my life who did their best to say what they believed would help.

At the time, I didn’t know what I needed anyone to say. I only knew I was hurting and that I felt alone with that hurt. But now, eighteen years later, when I look back through the lens of attachment, I know exactly what I needed: validation. I needed for someone to hear me when I said, “I know it was only four weeks and that it wasn’t meant to be and that I have a wonderful husband and two children who I love more than anything, but for four weeks I believed I was going to have a child. For four weeks I bonded with a life growing in me. I bonded with the future I imagined for this baby. It was real. It meant something to me. And the loss hit hard.”

What would’ve helped me feel less alone in that situation was to hear someone say, “The way you’re describing this to me is really helping me understand you. For four weeks you bonded with something real. All of the other things are true too and the rational part of you sees it… the loss was meant to be, you were barely pregnant to begin with and you are lucky in so many other ways… but still this life meant something to you, and still you feel devastated and still the pain is real. And it doesn’t matter how much it makes sense to me or anyone else because it just is. The pain just is. Your heart was broken and I’m so sorry that you’re hurting.”

That is validation. Imagine having someone show up for you with the type of validating response I just provided, and you might feel how powerful it can be. Admittedly, what I’ve just described are validation skills spoken by someone who’s been doing this professionally and personally for many years, but trust me when I say that everyone, with practice, can learn to be good at validating, including you and your partner. You know how badly you need empathy and understanding from each other, if for no other reason than because you know how bad it feels when you’re not getting it. Validation is an extension of empathy and understanding because it puts these two important experiences to words so that you communicate the experience. Empathy and understanding are internal experiences that exist within you; validation is a communication of the internal experience and exists between you and your partner. It’s nice when your partner feels empathy for you and understands you, but it’s more soothing and bonding when they tell you about it: “I can see this is really bothering you right now and it makes a lot of sense to me. This is a tough situation you’re in. It hurts me to see you hurt, but I’m right here to walk through this with you.”

I want to distinguish that validation is not the same as agreeing with facts or circumstances the other person offers. Here’s where people really get stuck and it often prevents them from validating another. You might say, “How can I validate her when she’s telling me I make terrible financial decisions when I know for a fact I’ve made some good ones? I can’t validate that. It’s not true.” And you’re right. It’s probably not true that every financial decision you’ve ever made was a bad one. But in this situation your partner is saying something else—now’s the time to get out your attachment lens. What she’s really saying is “I’m scared and I feel out of control. I don’t know any other way to get through to you how insecure I feel about money. I’m worried that if I let you handle it, something bad will happen, so I’m going to show you all the ways you’ve been wrong and then we can do things my way and we’ll be safe.” Through that attachment lens, what do you see? Vulnerability. I’m not asking you to validate the facts; I’m asking you to validate the vulnerability. Validate what you want to grow.

Here’s what invalidation sounds like in this situation: “You’re full of it. This is what you do: you look back at a few mistakes and then I get defined by that. Do I do that to you? Do I make lists of all the ways you’ve been wrong over the years?”

Here’s what validation sounds like: “I understand where you’re coming from and that you’re scared. Our financial safety is understandably important to you, and you feel desperate to get it figured out and you’re trying to make sense of it in the best way possible. But I don’t like the way you’re telling me. It feels unfair and leaves me feeling unseen and alone. Underneath all of it, I can see you, the real you, the caring and responsible you. And of course you’re scared. But we’ve got to learn to talk about this differently because I need to feel safe, too.”

What about validating anger? For most people validating “softer” emotions such as sadness and fear will come much easier than validating anger. It’s easy to assume validating your partner’s anger will make things worse, but most of the time the opposite is true. Without validation, anger will harden; with validation, anger will soften. Think of a time when you were mad at your partner. Try to conjure up the angry feeling in your body. Next imagine your partner invalidating your anger by saying something like “you’re overreacting,” or “you have no right to be mad, you do the same thing to me.” Now imagine that instead your partner says, with authenticity, “I hear you. I hear how mad you are and it makes sense to me. I would be mad, too, if I felt like my needs don’t matter to you.” A lot of the time this creates a “mic drop” moment because when anger is heard, understood, and validated, it no longer needs to fight for those things. Your partner doesn’t need to agree that your needs don’t matter to them, but they can agree that in a similar situation, if they believed that to be true, they would be mad, too. It’s hard to validate anger, really hard. Anger can be scary for many people. But I can tell you with confidence that until anger is validated (even if just by the person feeling it), it’s not going anywhere. Once anger is settled, and it might take some time and space, conversations are more likely to move forward. And keep this in mind: nobody likes the idea of validating another person’s anger. But everybody wants their own anger to be validated. Everybody wants to be heard and understood when they’re mad. “Golden rule” moment.

We have to be careful not to use validation as a way to manipulate a person or situation. Manipulation isn’t validation. Saying what you know someone wants to hear in order to shut them up or get your way is not the same as validation, and most people can easily feel the difference. But when it’s real, validation can have a powerful impact on the emotional safety of a hard conversation. It can help you get back, often relatively quickly, to the real issue—in this case, finances—and chances are you’re going to get further than you did the first time. Will it be perfect? Probably not. But it’s a better path that will lead to better places when you keep at it. And if you’re new to validation, you’ll be surprised to see that a little bit will go a long way.





Vulnerability


Vulnerability is effective in interrupting your negative cycle, and over time it can even help you decrease the frequency of the cycle or prevent it. In fact, your relationship will stagnate unless, in good time, both you and your partner are willing to be vulnerable.

Let’s say your partner gets a promotion at work and you feel threatened. You don’t want to feel threatened, but you do. It’s scary to you. You grew up watching one of your parents get promotion after promotion and with each one you saw them less and less. So when your partner shares the news, you get triggered. You don’t want to bring it up, that’s too vulnerable, but you know they can sense that something is keeping you from being fully happy for their success. They might think you’re mean or selfish or uncaring. After all, “What kind of person isn’t happy for their partner’s successes?” you ask yourself. You recognize you’re triggered when you probably don’t want to be, which is bad enough, but on top of that you’re shaming yourself for being so. So, you do what you’ve been doing for a long time to manage pain: you get distant to protect the relationship from your “bad” feelings. Steering clear is your comfort zone. But what would it be like to do something new? What would it be like to go to your partner and say, “Hey. I’m sure you’ve noticed my distance and I’d like to explain. I’ve been distant about your promotion because part of me is so proud of you and happy for you, and this other part is scared. A part of me worries that your success in your career will become so important to you that you’ll abandon me.” Instead of leaning out, what do you imagine will be different if you decide to take the risk to lean in?

Here are some other examples of vulnerability:

Setting boundaries and telling your partner you’ll have to leave the room if they keep saying mean things and “hitting below the belt,” even when you know they’ll be even more mad at you when you walk away.

Being honest about going over your budget and purchasing an expensive item, instead of being secretive to keep your partner from being disappointed with you.

Sharing with your partner how humiliating it felt when your employer disrespected you, instead of just complaining about what an awful person they are.

Speaking your truth, showing your deepest feelings, and being your authentic self, even at the risk of rejection. Yes, rejection hurts. But it doesn’t hurt as much as the loneliness of spending a lifetime hiding, especially from your partner.



A lot of couples new to therapy tell me how vulnerable they think they already are. “I cry all the time,” one might say. Or they tell me they’re an artist so of course they’re vulnerable. A lot of the time the very same people, while often highly emotional, aren’t as vulnerable as they may think. In fact, if you have an anxious attachment, you might be surprised to learn that vulnerability is likely to be as uncomfortable for you as it is for your avoidant partner. You just manage the discomfort very differently.

People often confuse emotional outbursts such as inconsolable crying and long, wordy rants with vulnerability, the idea being “I’m not holding back my emotions, so that means I’m being vulnerable.” These things are emotionally expressive, yes, but unless they involve stepping out of one’s comfort zone for the greater good, they are venting, not vulnerability.

While crying is not necessarily an emotional outburst, I’ve treated many partners who believe that because they cry in front of their partner, they are being vulnerable. But while crying always comes from a valid and worthy emotional experience, it is not always vulnerability in and of itself. Sometimes crying can be tears of angry protest. In this case, to be truly vulnerable, it might mean getting through the angry tears and down into the deeper part: “I am so sad right now and I feel so powerless.” That is true vulnerability. Sometimes what’s vulnerable, especially if you grew up in a home where tears were acceptable but anger wasn’t, is to talk about the anger. Sometimes vulnerable tears don’t involve words at all, but the felt experience of vulnerability is palpable. Again, vulnerability isn’t objective; it’s about stepping out of your comfort zone and authentically sharing your subjective experiences, which in a given moment are going to be different from person to person.





Influence


In a healthy relationship, you mutually influence each other. You motivate each other to grow and to be your best selves. But—and it’s a very big but—you don’t try to control each other. Controlling tactics, including stealth ones, create insecure environments. Nobody likes to feel controlled. It’s shaming and demoralizing. When someone is trying to control you, the message is “you’re less than, you’re not an adult, you don’t have a say.” There’s very little room for control dynamics in relationships that are supposed to be founded on intimacy, cooperation, and connectedness.

So what’s the difference between influence and control? Control demands instant gratification; influence is willing to let things sink in and simmer. Control gives away your power; influence is empowering and recognizes its own limitations. Influence is confident; control is scared. Influence is about self-expression and cooperation; control is draining and fear based.

Influence puts the immediate goal of behavior change to the side in order to focus on connection. Let’s say your partner has a hard time opening up about their feelings, leaving you feeling shut out. A controlling approach is to say, “Why can’t you just tell me how you feel? It’s not fair for you to just shut me out right now. If you’re not willing to work on your avoidant attachment and start talking about your feelings, I don’t even know if I want to be in this relationship.” In this situation, you’re trying to control your partner and demanding change right now.

Instead, from an influence perspective, your approach might be “I feel shut out, but I don’t think that’s your intention. I think maybe something else is going on. Maybe you’re afraid to share your feelings. I don’t want to put feelings on you that aren’t yours, but I also want you to know that I don’t think this is about you being stubborn.”

In the second example, you’re creating space for exploration instead of hoping for instant gratification and then getting frustrated when that can’t happen just yet. You’re not saying, “I need for you to do it this way or else.” You’re saying, “I’m impacted by this, but I also understand there’s deeper stuff here than what can be solved in this moment. Let’s keep talking.”





Curiosity


When you ask, “Hmmm, what’s going on with me?” instead of “I shouldn’t be upset about this,” you’re stepping away from self-judgment, which is shame inducing, into a place of understanding. The same is true when you’re curious about your partner’s inner experience—instead of sending the message that they should feel differently, which again comes from a place of judgment as opposed to acceptance, you send the message that they are worthy of being understood and that you want to learn more.

Curiosity can be especially effective when you are triggered. If you can notice your alarm bell putting you on high alert and can respond by moving into a curious mindset, you’ll actually move yourself out of the scary emotional center of the brain, where a lot of old fears linger, and into the rational center of the brain, enabling you to access both emotion and reason at the same time. When it comes time to respond to a relationship trigger, a balance of reason and emotion is your best friend. It’s the difference between a stale “I feel offended. I am sad. I need an apology,” on one hand, and an emotionally charged “How could you say that to me?! You’d better apologize right now or I’m leaving,” on the other. Somewhere in between is the sweet spot, which might sound something like “Honey, that really hurt. What’s going through your mind right now because that felt really harsh and I know that’s not how you meant for it to land?” Curiosity doesn’t ask that you change anything, only that you observe what’s happening. Nonjudgmental observation often naturally ushers in compassion. Compassion, whether for yourself or others, is regulating because it removes threat, which facilitates safety. When you’re self-regulated, there’s a good chance you’ll soften to your partner. When you feel softened, you will communicate more softly.

Curiosity also fosters connection because it will give you and your partner a chance to know each other’s inner worlds, not just what you see and hear on the surface. It leads to understanding, and feeling understood is medicine for us all. Who doesn’t want to be understood?

We need to be careful not to confuse curiosity with what I call “peppering with questions.” Curiosity is a mindset. You can be curious without asking a single question, and you can ask questions without really being curious. If you find yourself peppering your partner with questions, you’re probably trying too hard to manage your own anxiety. The kind of curiosity I’m referring to is more about seeking understanding.

Curiosity is always important, but in the context of negative cycles, it’s the most reliable guide when you feel a relationship trigger—that moment when your partner looks at their phone when you’re talking, or tells you you’re overreacting, or blames you for leaving the refrigerator open. In this moment, ask yourself, “What’s happening inside me? What am I thinking? What meanings am I making? How am I feeling? Is there tension in my body? If so, where is the tension sitting?”

Curiosity for your partner sounds like “I want to understand you. I’m not concerned right now with agreeing or not agreeing, I’m concerned with understanding how you came to think the way you do, and I’m curious about how you feel. Tell me about your intentions. Help me step into your world so that I can see you and see through your eyes. I want to understand the experiences you’ve had that have led you to this point.”

Let’s play this out using the example of the refrigerator door. Before you react with “I didn’t leave the door open, you did. Stop blaming me for everything,” check in with yourself. Get curious. Maybe you can say something to yourself like “Wow, I’m triggered. I feel unseen and misunderstood and that hurts.” Then see if you can step into your partner’s world and get curious about them. “Okay, clearly something’s bothering you. What’s going on? Is this about the refrigerator or are you upset about something else? Help me understand.” Maybe it’s about the refrigerator, maybe not, but you’re far more likely to get to the root of it with curiosity than you are with a battle. Of course, there needs to be space for you to say, “Hey, can you bring this up to me in a different way next time?” but your first goal is to create safety so that in the bigger picture, both of you are more likely to be heard and understood. And if you’re the partner who’s annoyed about the refrigerator? Instead of blame, maybe try “I’m really trying to cut back on our electricity bill. I think you may have left the refrigerator open. No judgment, just reminding us both to stay on top of the little things.” Perfect? Maybe not, but it’s better than coming in hot with blame and more likely to help you feel heard.





Tolerance


Nobody is perfect, especially not partners in relationships. Everybody gets tired, hungry, disappointed, overwhelmed. Everybody has bad moods. Nobody thinks exactly like you, makes meanings of events exactly like you, or handles situations exactly like you, and that doesn’t necessarily make them “wrong,” just different. Intolerant environments are reactive environments and reactive environments aren’t safe. This is why developing the skill of tolerance is especially important. When your partner does something that triggers you, a very important question to ask is “Can I let this one go?” Because a lot of the time when you look back, you’ll wish you had. If however you look back and say, “I shouldn’t have let that go,” you still have the opportunity to bring it up, and it might even be better to bring it up after the fact. I’m not saying to let things go that are very important; sometimes it’s best to speak up in the moment. But before you do, double-check to see if you’re responding or reacting, and how useful it will be to address it then and there. Take a breath or two, check in with yourself, and ask “What’s the best long-game way to handle this?” Also consider the four F’s discussed earlier in this chapter. If your tendency is to let things go, you might want to practice speaking up; if your tendency is to react instantly, you might want to practice letting it go in the service of creating a more tolerant environment.





Vulnerability Exercise


I’d like to close this chapter with an exercise that can help you better communicate understanding, empathy, and vulnerability to your partner, all of which, as we’ve learned, are the hallmarks of an attachment-friendly environment. As with all the exercises in this book, do your best: progress not perfection, and any amount of curiosity about your inner world and/or that of your partner will only help you get to know yourself and each other better—and you can build on that over time.

Use the following template:

When you see me (1)___________, inside of me I’m feeling

(2)___________because (3)___________,

and I can see how that leaves you feeling (4)___________.



1. What reactive behavior or words did your partner see you do or say?

2. What were the deeper emotions underneath your words and/or actions?

3. What unmet attachment needs (or other experiences) were at play?

4. What inner experiences did your reactiveness inspire in your partner?



Here are a couple of examples:

“When you see me (1) getting big and protesting, inside of me I’m feeling (2) desperate to be seen and heard because (3) it hurts so much that I can’t reach you, and I can see how that leaves you feeling (4) attacked and feeling like a failure.”

“When you see me (1) getting defensive, inside of me I’m feeling (2) afraid because (3) I don’t want you to see me as failing you, and I can see how that leaves you feeling (4) unheard and alone.”

You can also use the exercise as a template to express your needs:

When you (1)___________ instead of (2)___________

I feel (3)___________ and am more likely to (4)___________.



1. What can your partner do or say that would feel good for you?

2. What words or behaviors can this replace?

3. What attachment needs might get met, or what positive feelings might you experience?

4. How might you react differently?



Here are a couple of examples:

“When you (1) validate my feelings when I’m upset about something instead of (2) first trying to fix the problem, I feel (3) heard, seen, and comforted and am more likely to (4) eventually settle into a problem-solving mode.”

“When you (1) share your fear and sadness when you get triggered instead of (2) showing me only your anger, I feel (3) more empathic, understanding, and safe and am more likely to (4) respond to you in a way that feels good for both of us.”





CHAPTER 7 Reaching and Responding





All couples will have times when they need to initiate hard conversations. There will be topics where you don’t see eye to eye, the ones that bring up the biggest fears, anxieties, anger, and old wounds. These are the conversations that have never gone well, but still have to be addressed. Sometimes they’re obviously big topics: when to start a family, relocating, where to spend the holidays, attachment ruptures from the past, ex-partners, substance abuse problems, healing from an affair, a child struggling with a health issue. Sometimes they’re big topics that aren’t so obviously big, but have taken on “bigness” because of the unmet attachment needs surrounding them: keeping the house clean, what vehicle to buy or not buy, where to plant the garden, where to go for lunch, what to pack for the trip, chronic lateness, not texting back, and so much more.

All of these conversations involve some level of reaching and responding. One partner needs to reach by bringing something up, and the other is put in the position to respond. The way you reach and respond in your relationship, especially when it comes to these difficult topics, can go a long way toward building an attachment-friendly environment and helping to prevent negative cycles. Below are some guidelines to help the conversations go in a better direction than they have in the past, and help you plant seeds for a better relationship future.





Self-Focus


Coming from a place of self-focus is especially important when bringing up a concern or initiating a hard conversation. Some relationship experts call this strategy “I-statements,” but try not to get hung up on the “I.” You can say “I.” Or you can skip the “I” and still maintain a self-focus. You can even say “you,” depending on how you use it. (It’s better to default to authenticity over semantics.)

If you bring up a concern in an other-focused way, it sounds like “You ignored me at the party.” Versus the self-focused approach: “I understand you wanted to catch up with friends, and I want that for you, too. At the same time, I felt lonely a lot of the time. How about we try to strike a better balance next time.”

Notice the shift between the two. One doesn’t include or imply protest, accusations, shame, demands, or control. Instead it offers validation, vulnerability, sharing how you were impacted, and suggesting a solution.

Coming from a “place of self” doesn’t change the fact that you want something to happen or change, but it’s a way of taking ownership of your own needs instead of trying to get someone else to do things or feel a certain way so that your needs are met. When a person is communicating from a place of self, they are saying, “Here’s what’s going on for me. Here’s what feels good. Here’s what doesn’t feel good. When something doesn’t feel good, I’m going to reach out to you for help. When you’re unable to help me with something, here’s how I’m going to take care of myself.”





Concerns vs. Criticisms


When your partner brings up a concern, what feels better? To hear “you’re irresponsible” or “you said you’d be home at seven thirty, but I didn’t see you until after eight, let’s talk.” I’m guessing the latter. It’s important to deliver problems as a concern, rather than a criticism. Concerns address the behavior; criticisms attack the person. Concerns are solution-focused; criticisms are shame-focused. When tensions are high, if a problem is being addressed in a way that makes your partner feel attacked as a person, it will likely trigger them and make it harder for them to be open to your message.

This doesn’t mean there’s no room in relationships for constructive criticism. This is one way partners help each other grow. We just need to make sure your attachment-friendly environment is being protected. Here are some examples of voicing concerns instead of resorting to criticism:

Instead of:

“Why do you have to be such a slob? How hard is it to pick your stuff up as you go?”

Try:

“When your things are left on the counters, I have a hard time feeling settled. It’s overwhelming. Can we talk about this and try to come to a solution?”

Instead of:

“The problem with our relationship is that you’re emotionally unavailable. When I try to ask you about your feelings, you refuse to share anything with me.”

Try:

“I understand that it’s hard for you to share feelings, I really do. But I’m left feeling lonely when I can’t reach you in that way. Now that I’m starting to learn more about my own feelings, I’m starting to realize how important it is for me to also be able to connect with yours. I’d like for us both to somehow figure out a way to feel more emotionally connected.”





Include “Attachment Language”


Sometimes you can meet your partner’s attachment needs while bringing up a concern at the same time. Since most concerns are attachment related, I encourage couples to use this to the advantage of their relationship, especially when bringing up a tough conversation. By phrasing things with an attachment angle, you’re letting your partner know that you’re not the enemy, that you love them and want to feel close. This strategy also adds emotional richness to the relationship.

Instead of:

“You didn’t text me back and I was really worried. What happened?”

Try:

“I know you get busy and don’t want to be glued to your phone, but I got worried when I didn’t hear back because of how important you are to me [attachment meaning]. Can you remember to get back to me when you say you will?”

Instead of:

“We never agree about anything.”

Try:

“I know it’s frustrating for both of us when we don’t see eye to eye. But the way you see things is very important to me [attachment meaning] and even when I don’t agree with you, I still respect you [attachment meaning]. I need to know the same because that’s part of what closeness is to me.”





Use Validation


To feel emotionally safe going into a hard conversation, each partner needs to have confidence they’ll be heard and understood. Partners spend an incredible amount of energy trying to be heard and understood, so much so that until both partners are confident in this fact, the conversation really can’t proceed productively. By validating your partner’s experience while bringing up a concern, you can save a lot of time and energy. Show your partner validation by letting them know that, at the very least, you can recognize how they feel and think. If you can take it a step further and show that you not only recognize how they feel and think, but you can understand the way they feel and think, you will be able to create even more safety. By leading with validation, you are doing what therapist and author George Faller, LMFT, calls “creating invitations instead of accusations,” in other words pulling your partner in instead of pushing them away.



* * *



Especially remember to validate anger. You don’t have to agree with the why or tolerate poor behaviors like yelling or name-calling, but making space for anger is important especially if you’re hoping to help it defuse.

Instead of:

Why did you sign up for more guitar lessons when we need to be saving money (in an accusatory tone)?

Try:

“I know how much joy you get from your music, and it makes me happy to see you happy. At the same time, I’m concerned about the new classes you signed up for because of how much we need to cut back on our spending.”

Instead of:

“You shouldn’t be mad about that. You know I’m doing my best.”

Try:

“I get your frustration. You have every right to feel mad and let down. I’m not willing to stand here being spoken to disrespectfully, that feels bad and humiliating, but I can handle you being mad at me.”

Instead of:

“You never want to watch Netflix with me at night anymore. You’re always too tired to watch anything.”

Try:

“I know how hard you’ve been working to get your project done at work and how exhausting it’s been. One of the things I appreciate so much about you is your dedication to quality in everything you do, and I don’t want to take away from that. At the same time, I feel filled up when we make time for each other and miss our time together. It will help me if I can get some reassurance that when you get through this, we can get back to our routine.”





Lead with Appreciation


Before making a complaint, lead with appreciation. It sends the message that “I see your worth and value. I care about your feelings. Even though I have a concern, it doesn’t take away from how much I appreciate you as a partner.” When you do make the complaint, your partner is less likely to feel unappreciated, and less likely to be triggered.

Instead of:

“You weren’t being very friendly to my mom.”

Try:

“I really appreciate how hard you’ve worked to have a good relationship with my mom, and that’s a lot because I know how difficult she can be. You’ve been amazing. I noticed you seemed tense around her tonight. Was something going on you want to talk about?”





Avoid Controlling for a Certain Response


When trying a new method of communication, it’s easy to believe that it’s only successful when your partner responds in the way you’d like. But this belief stems from a place of control and inner insecurity—it doesn’t reflect real, authentic communication. Often anxious and disorganized-attached partners in particular will believe that unless something is resolved right then and there, there’s no hope that anything will ever change. This lack of trust shows up as a desperate need for a quick fix instead of giving it time. We all want our partners to respond in the way we’d like, but we aren’t always going to get that. Don’t let this be a reason to give up. You can’t guarantee your most desired outcome, but by cleaning up your side of the street, you can plant seeds for the future and increase the odds of attaining the relationship closeness you long for. Also, in moments when you get vulnerable and start showing up in newer, healthier ways, and your partner doesn’t respond positively, you have an opportunity to work through the painful feelings which come up in a new way. Often we want to control our partner’s responsiveness in order to prevent feelings of grief or a sense of powerlessness. But there is enormous growth potential in facing your innermost pain and not reacting in ways that will damage your relationship. And when you grow, the relationship grows… even in moments so painful that it’s hard to see the bigger picture.





Let Go of the Need to Agree


No matter how compatible you are in some areas of the relationship, you’re still two separate individuals. You’re going to bump up against differences around certain decisions. Maybe you get stuck in courtroom-style arguments trying to, what I call, “out-attorney” each other with facts and evidence in the hope of convincing the other person to see it your way. The problem is, nobody likes to be told their ideas and opinions are wrong, and it can often lead to one or both of you doubling down.

Instead of hoping to always agree, try making the goal that both of you be willing to hear each other’s perspectives. If anyone is going to change their beliefs, it’s more likely to happen when you feel heard and respected. Sometimes, though, you’ll just have to agree to disagree and go from there.

Instead of:

“That’s an inappropriate movie for the kids to be watching. I think it’s irresponsible of you to allow this.”

Try:

“In my eyes you’re a great dad and that’s something I appreciate about you. At the same time, there are some areas where we don’t agree, and to feel safe in the relationship I need for us to be able to talk about those things. One thing in particular is the movies we agree to let them watch.”





Prioritize Meaning Over Details


Hands down, the place where I see couples get the most stuck during communication is getting lost in the details.

Take Layla and Omar, a newly married couple who have recently started to argue a lot. During our session, they start arguing about Omar’s mountain biking. Layla thinks Omar spends too much time biking, and is maybe even addicted. Omar thinks all he’s doing is decompressing after a long workweek. Layla brings it up by telling Omar he spent “five hours riding yesterday.” Omar says that’s not true at all, it was more like “two hours.” Then Layla reminds him that she was out from noon to four and he still wasn’t back when she got home, while Omar interrupts saying when she was gone he mowed the lawn before his ride. Layla says when she came home the lawn wasn’t mowed and that he didn’t mow the lawn until after she got home, but Omar said he mowed the backyard while she was gone, not the front. And on and on it goes.

What do I, as a therapist, do with this?

Me: Layla, do you feel neglected when Omar is riding?

Layla: Yes.

Me: Then let’s not get lost in the details and instead focus on your feelings of neglect. Omar, do you believe that Layla is being unfair to you about this?

Omar: Yes.

Me: Then let’s try not to get lost in the details and instead focus on how it is for you to feel like you aren’t treated fairly.



The bigger meaning here is that Layla is walking around the relationship feeling neglected and worried about whether or not her husband has an unhealthy preoccupation with bike riding, and Omar is walking around feeling like he should be able to enjoy his downtime as he wishes and that Layla is treating him like a child. Who is right and who is wrong? That’s not really for me to decide. But these two will never figure out a solution to their problem until they focus on the bigger meanings in order to identify the real problems—feelings like resentment, loneliness, powerlessness, and maybe even despair—and find a way to talk about these without getting hijacked by details. The details are pitting them against each other like battling attorneys, and blocking emotional safety.

When Layla tells Omar, “The bigger meaning for me is that I miss you when you’re out riding and away from me. I feel lonely and I want to know you can see that, maybe even more than I want anything to change,” Omar is much more open. When Omar tells Layla, “When I don’t feel like an equal in your eyes, it’s lonely for me, like we aren’t partners. I feel less than. That’s when I feel the most alone,” Layla is also more open.





Avoid “Always” and “Never”


This one is pretty straightforward. The words always and never can take conversations down a dead-end road, because when someone is making blanket statements, it’s easy to argue for the exceptions. Always and never will also leave partners feeling boxed in, and the original issue gets buried, with no resolution. Also, always and never are often not true. Stick with what’s true.

Instead of:

“You always leave your stuff on my side of the bathroom sink.”

Try:

“I noticed your stuff was on my side of the sink again. Can you work on that so we both have our space?”

Instead of:

“You never make time to spend with me in the evenings.”

Try:

“Let’s try to spend more time together in the evenings. The time together helps me feel close to you, and I’ve noticed when we make time to connect we argue less. What are your thoughts?”





Loving Listening


So far we’ve covered skills to bring up your concerns in your relationship in the most attachment-friendly way possible. Now let’s address the other side of the conversation, when you’re on the receiving end.

“I really need to talk to you about something that’s been bothering me” is a statement even the most securely attached person might bristle at. It’s never fun to be forced to face one of your flaws or discuss a topic that brings you anxiety. If you have an insecure attachment and struggle with shame, being on the receiving end will be even more uncomfortable, because you’re already struggling, to some degree, with a fear of being unworthy or with a belief that parts of you are unlovable. In these moments, everything in you might want to say “Shut it down!” or “Turn it around” or “Defend before this gets worse!” But you and I both know this kind of response won’t get you the secure attachment with your partner you’re looking for, so let’s learn what will.

Hopefully, your partner brought their concern to you in a way that helps you feel safe and validated. Unfortunately, that won’t always be the case, especially when this work is still ongoing for the two of you. When your partner comes to you with a concern in a triggering or blaming way, see if you can give them some grace and do your best to listen anyway. I’m not saying to accept extremes such as yelling, name-calling, and other especially destructive behaviors, but when it comes to imperfect deliveries, remember that this entire process is about working together and sometimes that means picking up the slack for each other.

Of course, there will also be times when your partner delivers their concern in the most perfect way possible and you’re still triggered because, for one, it’s hard to talk about what you’re getting wrong, and two, you’re still working on yourself.

Most of us are familiar with the idea of “active listening,” and that it’s the key to good relationships in our personal and work life. On paper it sounds so easy. Just listen. Nod. Ask clarifying questions. How hard can that be? But when we look at listening through the lens of attachment, active listening can feel insurmountably hard in the moments when your partner wants to discuss something you don’t want to talk about. If you struggle with listening, instead of talking about why you should listen, let’s talk about why it’s been hard for you to listen. Because I’m confident that your authentic self genuinely wants your partner to feel heard in the relationship, just like you want to feel heard.

The problem is not how you feel now. The problem is how you feel when you’re asked to listen, especially when you already feel triggered and unsafe. In that moment you’re not hearing your partner say, “I love you and I love this relationship and something happened that hurt our bond and I really need to reach you so I can feel safe again.” What you’re hearing is “I think you’re all wrong, I don’t appreciate anything you get right, and now I’m going to tell you all about it. And I need for you to just stand there and listen.” If that’s what’s going through your mind in that moment, of course you will have trouble listening and a strong urge to react with counterblame or defensiveness.

But what if your difficulty listening isn’t really a difficulty with listening at all? What if the real problem is that you haven’t yet learned how to listen in a way that can actually feel good?

Listening is about connection. If you have an insecure attachment, you were raised in an environment where true connection wasn’t valued, and shame and control were. This bled over into listening. For you, listening during moments of conflict meant feeling shamed, misunderstood, unfairly blamed, invalidated, and/or unheard. Now when you have a hard time with your partner bringing up a concern, even if it’s delivered in the most attachment-friendly way possible, you’re not really blocking out your partner; what you’re really blocking is feeling shamed, misunderstood, blamed, invalidated, and unheard.

When people say things like “successful relationships require good listening skills,” the message is that listening is a chore, or a box that needs to be checked before you can finally be heard. That doesn’t have to be the case. When you start to view listening as a legitimate emotional support skill, it can feel really good. You know how giving someone a gift (especially when you know it’s something they’ve been wanting) can feel just as good as, if not better than, getting a gift? It’s the same concept. Listening is a way to love. For this reason, I’m going to change the term from active listening to loving listening. I want to help you move away from the idea that listening is only beneficial to your partner, and lean into it being for you, too, and your relationship. Listening is a connecting point. Show your partner you are lovingly listening by minimizing interruptions and distractions (put down your phone), using eye contact, reflecting back to them what you’re hearing and clarifying with them that you’re hearing correctly, validating their concerns, and trying to understand how they might be feeling.





Problem-Solving


Negative cycles usually come up when couples are trying to solve a problem—whose family to visit at Thanksgiving, how much to budget for groceries, what to do about a misbehaving child, what to cut from the budget after a loss of income, which city to move to. After you work on your negative cycle repair, you might feel bonded but you still need to make a decision about that major purchase or whether or not we should move to Montreal. I get that. The repair process is meant to reestablish emotional safety and attachment security in order to establish a healthier platform for problem-solving. It’s not meant to solve the problem itself; it’s meant to create an environment that will make a problem-solving conversation likely to be more comfortable and productive.

When you’re trying to solve a problem, what is considered a solution? I consider a solution to be a mutually agreed-upon decision that might leave one or both partners feeling disappointed, but that doesn’t create long-term resentment for either partner. Disappointment is fine and normal (as long as the same partner isn’t the one disappointed with every decision); resentment is a problem. Lingering resentments will bleed out into the relationship as bitterness and create blindsiding negative cycles.

Some solutions might be a compromise of the wants and needs of both partners, while other solutions mean one partner gets things their way and the other doesn’t. This is going to happen sometimes. Part of being in a long-term relationship means that at one time or another each partner will need to concede.

No matter what problem you are working through, the most important thing to remember is that the felt experience of intimacy and partnership is more important than the end result of most decisions. On your deathbed, you won’t be thinking about what couch you two decided to buy decades earlier. Instead, you’ll probably be thinking about how well you were able to love and be loved.

Here are some tips for effective problem-solving:





Find Confidence


Some partners struggle with feeling confident about their ideas and perspectives. We second-guess ourselves, even when deep down we know what we want. Then, when it comes time to talk about our preferences, we lack assertiveness, which makes negotiation difficult. If this is you, you might end up agreeing to something you don’t really agree with and then resenting your partner later. It’s really important for partners to be flexible and open to each other’s perspectives, but some partners, especially those vulnerable to people-pleasing at the expense of their own needs, are too open. Be clear within yourself about what you want and need, and advocate for it with confidence.





Genuinely Listen to Your Partner’s Perspective on the Topic


It’s easy to become so stuck in our own perspectives, and the feelings we have about our perspectives, that we have difficulty truly listening to our partner’s ideas. For the health of your relationship, it’s really important that each partner feels heard, especially when it comes to high-stakes topics. If your partner can tell you are genuinely listening, they will be more likely to feel safe and understood and appreciated, which in turn will help them be able to hear you and help you feel safe. In this case, you’re both more likely to drop your defenses and be more open to compromise when it comes to problem-solving.

If you’re having a hard time listening to what your partner has to say because you have so much to say on the topic yourself, self-regulate by being mindful of what’s happening in your body… tension? tightness?… and breathe into it. It’s possible to listen to your partner’s words and soothe your own body at the same time, and it will help you with urges to interrupt or tune out.





Clearly Deliver Your Perspective


When you are solving a problem, it’s important that you are communicating your perspective in a way that is clear and honest. Be as concise as possible, but if you’re confused about your thoughts and feelings, say so: “I’m still trying to work out how I think and feel, but here’s where I am right now.” Remember that the overriding goal is to express your position and feelings, not to get your partner to agree (more about this soon). Speak from yourself by using phrases such as “This is how I see it,” instead of “Here’s why you’re wrong.”



* * *



Be mindful of not ranting and/or repeating yourself as this is the best way to lose your audience. Instead, figure out what it is you’re trying to say and what it is you’re needing before you say it (anxious partners often process as they talk, so breaks to sort through your feelings and thoughts can be helpful here). If you’re on the receiving end of a partner who is repeating themselves, you might try pausing them and saying gently, “You’re repeating yourself. That tells me you’re worried I’m not hearing you. How can I show you that I’m really listening?”





Be Flexible


Healthy relationships require the ability to be open to your partner’s perspective. This isn’t easy, especially when triggered; it can feel like a direct confrontation to your perspective. But if you want to solve a problem, you need to try to let go of the idea that your view is the only true reality.

If you were raised with an insecure attachment, your goal was to stay safe, and one way to stay safe was to try to gain control over your environment. Don’t get me wrong: taking control over your life where you can and should is empowering. But those with insecure attachments often learn early on to be overly rigid about the way they do things, think about things, and want others to do things. It only makes sense… this is their way of feeling secure. As adults, this can show up as black-and-white thinking and inflexibility, which can get in the way of compromising with a partner. You might think you have to have the same ideas about parenting, politics, ways to navigate extended family relationships, whether or not to save for the future or enjoy yourself now, ways of eating, and on and on it can go. If you can relate, it’s important to the harmony of your relationship to open yourself up to consider your partner’s perspectives. That doesn’t mean you have to entirely let go of your value system, or the things most important to you, but if rigidity is getting in the way of truly hearing what your partner has to say, this can interfere with problem-solving and connection.





Validate Your Partner’s Perspectives and Feelings


You’ll need to be able to validate each other as you work toward a solution. Again, validation does not mean agreement. It means you’re able to understand the other person’s perspective to some degree and, more important, that you understand their feelings about the issue. Here’s an example of validation in a problem-solving context:

Instead of:

“Getting a dog is a bad idea right now. What would happen if we want to go away for the weekend at the last minute? I just don’t understand why you’d want that on our plate.”

Try:

“I can’t say I agree this is the right time to get a dog, but I understand why it’s important to you. You love animals. That makes sense.”





Don’t Try to Convince


Assertively presenting your argument is a healthy part of finding a solution, and that might mean trying to get your partner to see that your idea is a good one. Sometimes you’ll be successful—securely attached couples often have more capacity for flexibility when it comes to decision-making. But sometimes you won’t be and your partner won’t agree. We all have certain strong opinions that are unlikely to change. Your partner might feel just as passionately that their idea is best, as you do about yours. All couples will have these sticking points somewhere, and that’s not a bad thing; it’s just life. In fact, having a partner who has their own ideas is a sign of authenticity and inner strength, both attractive qualities in a person.

The key here is not to get stuck trying to convince your partner that your idea is the best one. When it’s evident that you see it differently and that’s just the way it is, the best thing you can do is find mutual respect for each other. Ideally you’ll be able to validate each other’s feelings, express disagreement, and move into navigating a solution. Sometimes it takes time to build mutual respect in the relationship in a way that each partner trusts, before trying to find solutions to your most challenging topics.

Instead of:

“Keeping sugar out of the house is only going to make the kids want more and sneak around. Studies have shown that depriving them is the worst way to go about it.”

Try:

“I know the kids’ health is a priority for you and I admire that about you. Their health is a priority for me, too, and I’m glad we both care so much. It’s been tempting for us to try to convince each other where we don’t see eye to eye, and I’d like to move away from that and see if we can find a way to make decisions based on mutual respect. After all, we both have the same goal of having healthy kids. What are your thoughts?”





Remember That Some Decisions Take a While


This can be hard to accept in our instant-gratification culture, but most things don’t need to be resolved overnight. Some decisions, especially the big ones, take weeks, months, or even years to make. Resolution sometimes comes at the end of many, many conversations. Having multiple discussions about tough topics allows space to slowly get to know each other’s perspectives, build mutual respect, and maybe even warm up to them. Resolution eventually evolves from there.





Understand That Not All Problems Have Solutions


Some decisions have deep ramifications and represent major differences in values or desired lifestyle. The most common example of this is when partners feel differently about whether they want to have children, either when or at all. Sometimes couples want dramatically different lifestyles and that significantly impacts their compatibility. Sometimes partners will be able to work through the differences, and sometimes they might decide that they aren’t lining up in crucial areas and it will be best to separate. My goal for couples in this situation is to be able to separate from a place of clarity and emotional health. When couples can discuss these big topics outside their negative cycle, they are far more likely to walk away from the relationship feeling confident about their decision. And, as always, when a situation feels bigger than a couple is resourced to navigate, professional help might be warranted.



* * *



There you have it, the skills that both reflect and fuel an attachment-friendly environment. If you have an insecure attachment, whether anxious, avoidant, or disorganized, your childhood was lacking in many or all of these crucial relationship elements. You are not broken, flawed, or less-than in any way if these skills don’t come naturally to you. It’s just that you haven’t yet learned how. There’s no shame in this. You can learn now. You can create an attachment-friendly environment for you, your partner, your relationship, and your children if you have them.

If you wear eyeglasses, you probably have moments when you don’t have them on and someone wants to show you something. Do you go ahead and look at the distorted image and assume it’s inherently distorted? Or do you say, “Hold on, let me put on my glasses so I can see clearly”? What we are doing here is building that pair of glasses. The next time you get triggered, step back, take some deep breaths, and say to yourself, “Hold on, let me get out my attachment lens.” You will never regret taking the extra moment to choose connection.





CHAPTER 8 Repairing After a Negative Cycle





No matter how much your relationship grows, negative cycles will sometimes get the best of you. Growth means they will happen less often and be less intense when they do. Still, when a negative cycle sneaks in, all is not lost. You can make full repairs.

One of the most, if not the most important parts of your relationship lies in your ability to repair from ruptures. It is the difference between a successful couple and an unsuccessful couple. When you can fully repair from ruptures, you and your partner will build trust; trust builds and reinforces attachment-friendly environments; attachment-friendly environments minimize negative cycles. And that’s not all: successful repairs will make space for you to harness the bonding potential of vulnerability and give the two of you the opportunity to choose each other again and again.

Often when couples are humming along and feeling increasingly confident in their relationship, they’ll get blindsided by a negative cycle. When I’m seeing a couple, they may go weeks without much more than the small arguments they’ve learned to navigate on their own and then they’ll come back one week feeling wholly demoralized. “We had a big one,” they report. “Now what? Are we going back to square one?”

The answer, of course, is no. Setbacks are a normal part of the growth process.

Often these unexpected blowups happen around a topic the couple has been trying to avoid. It’s as if their nervous systems are saying, “We’re healthier now. It’s time to take a pass at that topic we’ve been dodging.”





Spotting Subtle Ruptures


Most of the time, if a repair is needed, you’ll know. Most negative cycles are obvious arguments, and if you didn’t have a chance to interrupt the cycle before it got too far out of hand, you’ll need to repair it. But some negative cycles are more subtle. If the climate of your marriage is pretty warm and sunny, you might be able to say to yourself, “I know I’m loved, I know I’m appreciated.” But what about today’s weather? Are you carrying around an air of hurt? Are you feeling slightly annoyed but can’t say why? Does something feel off and insecure? Is there unspoken tension in the air? Some of this might be normal relationship friction you can handle on your own by, say, shifting your perspective without necessarily needing to bring it up with your partner. Not every little thing needs to be processed. Sometimes partners just get in bad moods and it can be easy to start looking for something (or someone) to blame. But sometimes it is about the relationship. If the feelings aren’t going away when you have a meal or get some sleep, or if they do go away but keep resurfacing, or especially if they’re accompanied by resentment… these are signs that a reparative conversation is in order to restore closeness.

Negative cycles are fueled by a host of inner experiences, vulnerabilities, and meanings, all of which have one thing in common: an unmet attachment need. In other words, there’s been an attachment rupture. Another way to know you need to work toward a repair is if you’re feeling any of the following (some of these experiences aren’t technically feelings, but I’m describing them in this way to bring the concept of attachment needs to life):

I don’t feel like my needs matter

I don’t feel valued or wanted

I feel disrespected

I don’t feel like an equal

I don’t know that you trust me

I don’t know that I can trust you

I feel like you weren’t there when I needed you

I feel like I can’t get it right no matter what I do

I feel unappreciated

I don’t know that I can ever get it right for you, no matter how hard I try

I feel like I’m letting you down

I feel emotionally invalidated

I feel misunderstood and unheard



…or any other moment when an attachment need is perceived to be unmet.

If you live in a sunny-climate home but are experiencing any of these feelings, try not to get stuck in a battle with yourself. Don’t try to convince yourself out of your emotions. It’s tempting to say, “I know I’m valuable to them, and most of the time I feel that… maybe I should ignore the fact that I don’t feel valuable right now.” Or “I know they see me as a good partner, so why do I feel like they see me as a complete letdown in this moment? I must be crazy.” You’re not crazy. You’re experiencing an attachment rupture. Your relationship is saying, “Hey! Over here, can we look at this so we can get back to our warm, safe and secure climate?” That is the goal of repair: to get you back on track.





Mending Fences


Nothing feels quite as good as a successful repair from a negative cycle. When I work with couples, I place a heavy focus on reparative conversations. I guide them through the work to better understand, feel, and share all the deep, rich, previously unknown material that came alive within each partner during the rupture—so much more than what they alone could see on the surface—and help them connect from this place of vulnerability. At the end of the sessions, couples leave feeling close, connected, and hopefully much better than they did when they came in.

The reason repairs are initially easier to achieve in a therapist’s office than at home is that the work has to happen within the safe confines of an attachment-friendly environment. (Behavior change takes less work and self-discipline than you might realize when the environment is ripe for change.) This environment includes listening, validation, and staying out of negative-cycle behaviors like blame and defensiveness. Since distressed couples don’t yet know how to create this kind of environment, it’s my job to help them do just that so that they can make repairs at home. As couples and I travel through the repair process session after session, they gradually learn to create attachment-friendly environments and repair on their own, until I’ve eventually worked myself out of a job.

I’m sharing this process because I want to help you do the same thing at home. This book isn’t therapy, but the work I do with couples doesn’t need to be confined to a therapy office. Like the couples I see in person, you can learn the process of repair well enough to put it into practice in your relationship.

Alejandra and Ryan are a couple I worked with to help them learn to repair. I’d been seeing them for seven months and they were doing really well in therapy. Not only were they able to interrupt negative cycles, but they were being more vulnerable with each other in general. Instead of coming at Ryan with protest and accusations when she had a concern, Alejandra was able to say, “Here’s what’s going on with me and it feels important that we talk about it.” Ryan learned to really hear and respond with presence and validation (even when he had a different perspective of the situation). Rather than harboring resentment by avoiding charged topics, Ryan was also starting to bring up his own concerns with attachment-friendly language like “I feel hurt about something. Can we talk about it?” Alejandra was also increasing her capacity to listen with love. They were both learning to be more flexible and willing to understand each other.

One day they entered the office feeling obviously demoralized. They’d been doing so well, they told me, and then bam, out of the blue, two days before we met, they found themselves in a negative cycle over something that “shouldn’t have even been a big deal.” One minute they were talking about how to care for houseplants and the next minute they were hurling accusations in desperation to be heard and building walls in an effort to hide. They were still reeling from the fight.

When couples bring me examples of negative cycles from their week, my response is always “Let’s work to better understand what happened.” My intention is never to get them to repair. I hope they’ll repair and leave feeling better, but that’s not my goal. My goal is to create understanding and empathy. I know that if I can help them see the negative cycle for what it really was—two people trying to reach each other and stay safe—repair will emerge on its own. In other words, my job is to create space for healing, to set up the right environment for it to happen naturally, not to force healing. Try to apply this logic to your relationship… don’t try to make healing happen, try to create the right environment where healing is most likely to emerge on its own.

Let’s take a quick look at what happened before Alejandra and Ryan got lost in their negative cycle: Ryan moved one of their houseplants to a new location. Alejandra thought the location he chose wasn’t optimal. “What did you put it there for?” she asked. “Devil’s ivy likes little sun… you’ll fry it.” Ryan responded that Alejandra was, “once again, the expert on everything.” From here, both partners got heated and a negative cycle ensued.

Since Ryan was the first one to get triggered in this particular situation, I asked about his experience in the moment when Alejandra asked him why he moved the plant. What was really going on with him when he sarcastically accused Alejandra of being, “once again, the expert on everything”? As Ryan and I explored his experience, it gave Alejandra a chance to see new parts of Ryan, view him through an attachment lens, and either understand him in a way previously unknown to her, or hear him learn more about himself.

Underneath his snarky comment were the vulnerable parts of Ryan that were hiding and afraid to be seen. Vulnerable Ryan didn’t hear Alejandra say, “What did you put it there for? Devil’s ivy likes little sun… you’ll fry it.” Instead, he heard his dad say, “What’s wrong with you, Ryan? Why are you so stupid?” In a fraction of a second, shame welled up in him, and he felt the raw sting of betrayal. And then anger. It hurt so much to think Alejandra could talk down to him like this, like he was nothing (which wasn’t Alejandra’s intention, but the perception of Ryan’s nervous system’s experience with past attachment wounds). From there his attachment system kicked in to say, “I have to let her know how much I’m hurting so that she’ll see me and she’ll have compassion for me, and she’ll want to help me… and I can only do that by making her hurt, too. Then she’ll be able to feel some of what I feel.” It goes without saying that his strategy backfired.

I worked with Ryan to uncover his deeper fears and other feelings. I used my own relationship with him to start. I helped him to realize that through my eyes, nothing about him was shameful. In fact, to me, everything that happened between the moment of Alejandra’s comment and the moment when Ryan protested back made so much sense considering his past experiences. Hearing me say this was a game changer. Ryan, like many of the people I’ve worked with in my career, had never once in his life experienced being validated in this way.

That is connection.

The next step was to take the connection between Ryan and me and move it over to Ryan and Alejandra. I asked, “Ryan, would you be willing to share with Alejandra what we’ve talked about? What feels important for her to know right now?”

After a pause, Ryan turned to Alejandra: “I want you to know that when I get mad like that, all you see is the anger. You see me saying hurtful words, and you see that look on my face, and I know you get caught off guard. But what’s really happening underneath it all is that I’m feeling like I’m worthless and I’m scared that you’re seeing me in that way, too. It hurts so much. I just want you to see how much it hurts. And I’m so sorry that’s how I tried to show you.”

When Ryan had finished speaking, we all sat quietly. As you can imagine, these are very powerful moments. Eventually Alejandra, very softly, and with Ryan’s hand in hers, responded, “Thank you for sharing all of this with me. Thank you for letting me in. It all makes sense to me.”

You’ll notice that she didn’t say anything like “it wasn’t my intention to upset you.” Talking about intentions are important, as are upheld apologies and commitments to change (when relevant), but the process I’m describing is not just about explanations, apologies, and commitments to try harder next time. Repairs, at their heart, are about creating deeper understanding. When these conversations all play out in the way that I hope, repairs contribute to greater levels of connection, and connection is far more likely to create relationship resilience than a simple “I’m sorry. I’m going to work harder.”

Next, I went through the same process with Alejandra. In my sessions, I help each partner share with the other because I want them to really see the other, to see what they couldn’t in the moment things got tense: their true selves, the people they really are underneath the protective walls and accusations. By facilitating this deep level of communication, I’m also helping couples build a powerful bonding experience… and this is my goal for you, too.

When Alejandra and Ryan left my office, they felt much closer and connected to each other than when they arrived, because both partners were willing to be vulnerable, and vulnerability breeds intimacy.

You might be wondering if, or why, Ryan’s inner hurt excused him from his outer rudeness. It didn’t, but I get this question a lot. “Just because Ryan was hurting inside, that makes it okay for him to say whatever he wants?” No, definitely not. Although my focus is on inner experience, I’m looking for behavior change as much as everyone else. If I thought it would work to simply tell someone, “Your behavior is atrocious and you’re going to push your partner away if you don’t change, so stop that,” I would do it. What I’ve found is that real relationship change takes place more effectively and sustainably when motivated by empathy and understanding than it does when solely motivated by reasoning and fear of consequences. If this weren’t the case, Ryan and Alejandra would’ve found their way out of negative cycles long before coming to me.





Repair Exercise


Before you can show yourself, you have to know yourself.



Now it’s your turn. I created this exercise to help you understand the real, authentic, vulnerable you that gets hidden during negative cycles. If you’re working through the book on your own, complete your side as a way to get to know yourself better and connect with yourself. If you’re reading this book as a couple, each of you complete your side. When working as a couple, my intention is for the two of you to share with each other what you find about yourselves. My hope is that by working through this exercise, you’ll be able to say to each other, “Here I am. Here’s the ‘me’ I wasn’t able to show you in that moment.” I want to help you piece together the puzzle of yourselves and each other, so that you can truly see each other.

To start, come up with an example of your negative cycle. Pull up the event in your mind and try to re-create it as vividly as possible.

Now, each of you pick a moment during the negative cycle when you can recognize being triggered. Instead of remembering the cycle as a whole, pick one small moment: a word, phrase, behavior, or body language (you could also include a shift in energy, or an awareness of tension in the air). Stick to one specific moment only. If you try to look at the negative cycle in its entirety all at once, you might get lost.

During this exercise, you won’t be perfect. This is an exploration process, a jump start on curiosity, not an exercise in perfection. You might not be able to answer some of the questions, and that’s okay. Anything vulnerable that you share with your partner during a repair process is far better than nothing. The last thing I want is for someone to give up on sharing themselves more authentically with their partner because they can’t answer all these questions with perfect accuracy.

Here’s the chart from chapter 4 to help you visualize the process:



Now that you have your moment, grab a notepad and use the following prompts:





1. Describe the moment.


What did your partner do or say? Was it a word, a phrase, behavior, and/or a facial expression? Were you suddenly aware of tension? If you’re having a hard time remembering, ask yourself, “What happened just before I noticed being uncomfortable?” Try to be as specific as possible.





2. What meaning did you make of your partner’s words or behaviors?


Remember, these are perceptions, not necessarily reality. For example, if the meaning you make in a tense moment is “they must be mad,” that doesn’t mean your partner was actually mad. It means that’s how you perceived it in the moment, and this awareness will help you unlock what may have automatically come next.





3. Dive into your body and see if you can remember any physiological sensations you felt in that moment.


Did you notice tightening in your chest, tingling in your limbs, pressure in your head, a clenched stomach, shallow breathing, or any other physiological sensation? Think of how you feel when you’re relaxed and note how different it felt in your body during this moment. Often it’s easier to notice an uncomfortable feeling by focusing on the contrast.





4. What were your unmet attachment needs in that moment?


Think about what you believe your partner’s words or behaviors meant. How did that make you feel? Did you perceive being invalidated, unappreciated, abandoned, or unaccepted, misunderstood, like you can’t get it right in your partner’s eyes, or any other attachment-related distress? Do you recognize these experiences from an earlier time in your life?





5. What vulnerable feelings seem to have welled up?


Consider how helpless you may have felt, the desperation or confusion present. Perhaps you sensed loneliness, fear, shock, a sense of betrayal, or even grief. It could have been deeply rooted anger (the kind that’s about more than just the moment), or a sense of abandonment, or shame. As you consider these feelings, take some deep breaths, tune in with your body, and see what awareness comes up around how the moment made you feel on a deeper level.





6. What is your childhood-rooted shame telling you (or shame stemming from past adult relationships)?


Have you felt these feelings before, or did the situation seem familiar, even if it was about something quite unrelated in topic? What’s happening below the surface, regarding the needs you have but don’t feel are being met, or perhaps even invalidated or under threat? Examples: I’m unworthy of really being loved. I’m stupid. I’m a loser. I’m unworthy if others are unhappy with me. I’ll never get it right. I have to hide myself to be acceptable. Having strong feelings is weak. Others don’t care about my feelings. I have to be small and quiet to be acceptable. I’m a burden.





7. What protective feelings came up?


What we often don’t realize is how much our subconscious moves to protect us. Its overriding goal is to motivate us to take action… any action to prevent the deeper experiences of vulnerability such as fear, despair, and shame. We might feel anger, frustration, desperation, overwhelm, powerlessness, humiliation, irritation, jealousy, and more when we perceive an attachment threat. Refer to the feelings chart in the appendix if you need help narrowing down your protective feelings.





8. Did you fight, flight, freeze, or fawn?


Recall earlier in the book where we discussed the four Fs:

Fight: Did you get bigger to be heard? Did you protest to show your anger? Did you blame to say “change!”? Did you criticize to make them see they’re wrong? Did you defend yourself or deflect concern to change their mind? Did you make accusations?

Flight: Did you say, “I don’t want to talk about this right now” (as a way to avoid, not to take a break)? Did you try to avoid the conflict by convincing them to see it differently? Did you deflect their concern to change the subject and avoid the conflict?

Freeze: Did you shut down? Did you go numb?

Fawn: Did you say what they want to hear to get the situation to end? Did you try to make them happy to change the subject?





9. How might your partner have been impacted?


Did your partner get left with an unmet need? What might have happened in their body? What meaning did they make: being unheard, invalidated, misunderstood, blindsided, unappreciated, attacked? Did their shame get tapped into? Did they feel unlovable or unworthy in your eyes? What did they do next? Did they fight, flight, freeze, or fawn?

Next, write down your experiences in a narrative format. Here are some examples:

1. My partner was complaining about something I did, repeating the same thing again and again. No matter what I said, they just kept going. I don’t remember what happened in my body, but I know I was thinking, “Here we go again, I’m being bulldozed.” I felt overwhelmed and frustrated. In that moment, I didn’t know if my needs mattered. I have deeply rooted anger around this. I grew up in an environment where I felt powerless to say I wasn’t okay with the way I was being talked to. I got overwhelmed and started to tune them out. I was trying to stay safe and not let anger get the best of me so I didn’t say something I regret and make things worse. My partner saw me disengage as if I just didn’t care. I can see how that could have left them feeling desperate for a response.

2. When my partner was late getting home and didn’t tell me in advance, I felt my body get tense and heavy. I said to myself, “They don’t care to respond to my needs.” On the deepest level I felt abandoned, defeated, and crushed. Also, I got really scared that nothing will ever change. The pain hurt, so my fight response kicked in and I felt enraged and desperate to be heard. In my desperation to be heard, I kept telling them what they were doing wrong. I thought, “If only I could say it in the right way, they’d finally get it and help me not have to feel so abandoned and scared.” What my partner saw was me being angry and saying the same thing repeatedly. I can see how that left them feeling overwhelmed and then they disengaged.

3. When my partner was talking to my child in a way that I thought was too harsh, I felt panicky. My heart started to race. I thought, “My child’s going to suffer, and I can’t prevent it.” I get scared that my child’s needs will go unmet and everything will fall apart, like when I was a child. My worst fear is messing it up as a parent. I also felt angry at my partner for not helping me feel safe, since they know how much I care about this. I felt alone. I angrily took over this situation. All my partner could see was that I was being angry and unsupportive and then they went to their protective place.

4. My partner asked me if we could help friends move over the weekend. I had my own reasons for wanting to say no, but I was too afraid to say no. I grew up thinking people who say no are mean and shameful. I said to myself, “I don’t want to help someone move this weekend, but if I say no, my partner will be mad at me.” It felt like they were putting me in an impossible position. Now I know that’s not true, but at the time it made me think my needs didn’t matter to them. I felt caught off guard, alone, and defeated. My chest felt tight, and I noticed a deflated feeling. I said yes even though I meant no. When the time came to help with the move, my resentment overpowered me and I was snarky the whole time. This was my way of saying, “I’m angry, but I’m too afraid to talk about it.” All my partner could see is me being cynical for no apparent reason. I can see how that left them feeling confused, alone, and treated unfairly.

5. My partner said something that made me think that they think someone else is physically attractive. I felt threatened and my stomach knotted up. My mind said, “This is it, I’m being betrayed.” I’ve been cheated on in the past, and it was devastating. I can’t bear to feel that way again. I felt scared and a sense of loss. I felt angry and I just shut down and disengaged because I was afraid to let anger seep out and push them away. All my partner could see was the silent treatment. I can see how that left them feeling confused and shut out.



If you and your partner are doing this exercise together, it’s time to share with each other. I suggest taking turns sharing in the following way:

Partner 1: share your narrative

Partner 2: respond

Partner 2: share your narrative

Partner 1: respond



Keep responses short, validating, and focused on your partner. We aren’t trying to find a solution or correct for accuracy right now. This exercise is less about exact wording and more about seeing and understanding more about each other. Learn how to be together in this discomfort, how to hear each other and share. For it to be successful, we really need to make space for vulnerability. When your partner shows their vulnerability, it’s so important to treat it with care. Remember how scary it is for you to share vulnerably. Keeping some of these in mind when you respond can help:

Show appreciation that they were willing to share with you.

If you feel close to them as they share, tell them how close you feel.

Don’t apologize or explain yourself, just sit with them.

Hold their hand, or make another physical connection.

Validate: It makes so much sense, you make so much sense, I understand your feelings, I understand you.

Keep it short and simple. Aim for three sentences.



Here are examples:

Thank you for letting me see you. I feel let in and close. You make sense to me.

Thank you for trusting me with all this. Nothing about your vulnerability is weak. I see you as strong right now. What you’re sharing with me isn’t too much. I want to see all of you.





Apologies and Behavior Changes


For many of today’s adults, one of the hardest parts of this approach is forgoing the immediate need for an apology. This generation grew up in a world where apologies were paramount—your parents likely focused more on “say you’re sorry” when things went wrong than “let’s understand why you did that.” Don’t get me wrong: I think apologies are very important. When you apologize to your partner you’re saying, “I see how what I did hurt you and it hurts me to hurt you.” Apologizing shows your willingness to take accountability, which shows a willingness to work on the behavior. The words “I’m sorry” are important and sometimes they’re enough. But there will be times when triggers are more powerful and wounds are deeper, and the “I’m sorry” will be much more effective when delivered in the context of a full repair conversation.

Also, apologies are more meaningful when you take the time to understand how your behavior impacted your partner and then share your understanding. A sincere “I’m sorry I said that” is meaningful, but “I’m sorry I said that. I can see how that left you feeling really hurt and betrayed,” or “I’m sorry I said that. What did that feel like for you?” is even more so.

What if you’re thinking that it’s nice to understand what’s going on beneath, but what you’re really interested in is making sure things change so that it won’t happen again? This work all exists for the overriding goal of closeness and harmony, both of which ultimately hinge on behavior change. Behavior change is a crucial part of the repair process. No amount of insight, empathy, and understanding matters if a couple can’t shift out of behaviors that damage attachment safety and erode trust, and into those which foster connection and trust. Your relationship simply can’t thrive when damaging behaviors aren’t improving. But behavior change can’t happen in isolation. Safe and healthy environments create space for safe and healthy behaviors. And even in the most attachment-friendly environment, behavior change will not happen right then and there.

Real and sustainable change takes space, time, and consistency. This book aims to teach you how to create the space.





CHAPTER 9 Attachment Injuries and Repair





Most of the examples of conflict in this book so far are hard but relatively commonplace ruptures around topics like finances, extended-family issues, misunderstandings, and big decisions that need to be made. But what about those of you who are dealing with bigger wounds, ones that have had a greater impact on trust? Conflicts like this could include an affair, a serious lie or chronic dishonesty, failure of a partner to show up in a key moment (a hospitalization or giving birth, for example), abusive behavior, ongoing substance abuse problems, especially damaging fights, or anything else that has a theme of betrayal, has deeply impacted the trust in your relationship, and is still alive in the relationship today, sometimes even years later.

These types of issues are more than just ruptures; they are attachment injuries. Attachment injuries can be recognized because they have such a profound impact on trust and connection that without healing (which I define as reestablishing trust), it might be impossible for the relationship to thrive. They are also characterized by a strong feeling of betrayal. Some couples are struggling with multiple injuries. Often injuries are one-sided (in the examples above, one partner is the “wounding partner” and the other is the “wounded partner”), but both partners can have attachment injuries in the relationship, and sometimes even over the same event.

If you’ve been on the receiving end of an attachment injury, you probably know what I’m talking about. The memory of the event is likely entering your mind as you read this, and perhaps you can even feel your body react. Maybe you notice your chest get heavy, your jaw tightening, or suddenly you can’t concentrate on what’s in front of you. Attachment injuries are subjective: what one person experiences as a betrayal, another person might not. Like all traumas, attachment injuries are defined by the meanings of events and the impact, not by the events themselves.

While your attachment injuries might be “bigger” than the more day-to-day ruptures referenced throughout the book, they share an important commonality: attachment injuries can be healed. They can even create opportunity for deeper levels of growth. But the process is a sensitive one and before any healing conversations can even begin, certain baseline criteria need to be met.

My former client Leah was a trail runner. One afternoon she slid down a muddy slope and ended up in the ER with a tremendous amount of pain and a broken leg. Her partner, Max, didn’t show up to the hospital for several hours because of a work crisis he felt he couldn’t interrupt without serious repercussions at work. Leah, alone and in pain, was devastated and felt deeply betrayed. Clearly this was an attachment injury, but it wasn’t an isolated event. Leah had long felt that Max put work first. Still, this hospital moment was the last straw for Leah. When it really mattered, Max wasn’t there for her. At first Leah wasn’t sure she could stay in the relationship.

Max didn’t get it because his sense of safety in the world—including the safety of Leah and their relationship—was rooted in being successful at work. To fail at work was to fail everything, to be a failure. In Max’s mind, Leah wasn’t alone on a hill after her fall; she was getting medical care and had doctors and nurses helping her. Max knew he’d get there eventually, just as soon as he could. I’m not excusing Max’s behavior, but it’s important to understand that what can appear to be callousness is often its own version of a trauma response, in this case resulting from toxic messages from childhood centered around Max’s worthiness, which drove his desperation to “keep it all together,” even at the expense of the attachment security of his relationship.

With the relationship on the line, Leah and Max both decided they wanted to make it work and to go to therapy. I let them know that we had a wound to heal, and they both agreed to try to work through it. Could we, as therapist and clients, work to prevent situations like this in the future? Yes. But first we had to approach the situation with openness to understanding all the moving parts. For Max, going forward meant that he had to be willing to consider Leah’s experience of the event, even when nothing in him ever meant to intentionally leave Leah feeling so betrayed and with shattered trust. He had to agree and accept that an attachment injury had occurred.

Once we established that an attachment injury had occurred, I explained to Leah and Max that the only way through the healing would be to process the injury in an attachment-friendly environment with safe, reparative conversations. Safety isn’t only important for the protection of the wounded partner; it’s also important for the protection of the wounding partner, meaning just because the offending partner behaved in a way that created a lot of damage, this doesn’t mean they deserve being on the receiving end of insensitive, mean, or abusive language. Safety for both parties means avoiding statements like “How could you be so insensitive? Are you some kind of sociopath?” “You’re being a little dramatic, you know I did the best I could,” “Why can’t we just move on?” or “I hope our children don’t turn out like you.”

I also explained to Leah and Max that the process takes time. If our goal was to rebuild trust and safety in the relationship, the best we could do was to create the right conditions for healing to emerge naturally and gradually. We couldn’t force or shame it into being. The nervous system has its own time line. As hard as it is when you miss your partner and long for the safety and closeness you once had, try to think of healing these wounds as a process rather than a one-time event. It’s not about being done or not done (either you heal or don’t; either you forgive or don’t; either you get over it or you don’t). You won’t have one conversation and feel suddenly healed. Instead, when things are going in a healing direction, one day you will realize, “Oh, wow, I don’t think I’m as affected by that event as I used to be.” This, as you probably can imagine if you’ve ever experienced an attachment injury, is huge.





Healing Conversations


The conversations for repairing an attachment injury are similar to those for repairing a rupture; they need to include healthy amounts of vulnerability, validation (including validation of anger), and empathy. But because the wound is deeper, so too must be the healing.

Here is a step-by-step guide for a healing conversation for an attachment injury: If you’re the one who created the injury (the “wounding partner”), it’s essential that your partner gets space to share how they were impacted. For Leah and Max this meant Leah was able to tell Max what it had been like for her to feel second to Max’s career and what it was like for her on the day she sat in the hospital alone and in pain. But Leah needed to do that outside of a negative cycle, meaning she needed to share her experience from a place of self, of “this is what it was like for me,” instead of from a place of blame, judgment, and shame dumping. She also had to do this without minimizing her own feelings or apologizing for her experience (“Maybe I shouldn’t be so upset after all,” or “I’m probably just overreacting”).

Here’s how a reparative share doesn’t sound:

“I can’t believe you could leave me there alone like that. How could you be so insensitive? I just broke my leg and you couldn’t miss work for two hours? You don’t care about anyone but yourself.”

Here’s how a reparative share does sound:

“I was so angry, but underneath that I felt devastated. It felt like the floor dropped out from under me. I felt so betrayed and alone and even humiliated, as if I’m not even worth showing up for.”

If you’re the wounding partner, it’s critical that you’re able to take in your partner’s message, try to understand it, and then empathize and validate them. Reflect back to your partner what they’re telling you about their experience; let them know you can hear. Try to step into their world. Maybe the ER experience wouldn’t have been as sensitive for you as it was for Leah; maybe you have different emotional experiences around medical events or for whatever reason it just wouldn’t have bothered you. But everyone has something that might leave them feeling betrayed. Picture a scenario where you might feel betrayed. What would that moment have been like for you? What would have helped you when you felt betrayed? Bring that compassion and openness to these conversations, and remember to listen with love. Use whatever experiences of your own you can draw up to feel empathy and use your empathy to validate your partner’s feelings: “I remember when I saw you’d texted your ex. I felt very betrayed in that moment. I needed you to hear how upset I was. I’m understanding that’s how you feel right now, and it makes sense to me.”

Here’s how a reparative response does not sound:

“I hear you and I’m sorry. Next time I’ll try to be more sensitive…. But I wasn’t betraying you. My job depended on that deadline I was trying to meet. You know how important that project was. What about me?”

Here’s how a reparative response does sound:

“I hear how much this hurt you. I hear how angry and devastated you were when I didn’t show up. I’m thinking of moments similar to what you’re describing, when I’ve felt betrayed, and I can feel some of that right now. It hurts me to think of you hurting like that, of feeling so alone. It breaks my heart to imagine you questioning your worth. It makes sense. I get it. I really get it.”

As you’re having reparative conversations, use nonverbal communication for added support. Delivering messages of empathy and validation with eye contact and gentle touch (if your partner is open to it) can make the process exponentially more soothing and healing.

This conversation might need to happen multiple times for trust to rebuild. It can feel demoralizing to have the same conversation about the same wound over and over, to the point that you wonder if you’ll ever get past it and be able to move on. Here are common traps to watch out for that can signal when these conversations are no longer effective or are obstructing healing.





Communicating in a Negative Cycle


When I’m working with a couple with an attachment injury, we’re not able to address that injury at the start of therapy. We can talk about it as an event, but we’re not going to dive into healing conversations until they’re able to talk about smaller problems outside of a negative cycle. When they can do that, it’s a signal it’s time to move forward. If you and your partner are trying to navigate through an injury repair and you’re getting stuck in negative cycles, you might need to back up and first work on your negative cycles around less sensitive material.





Shame Spiraling


Shame spiraling happens when the wounding partner gets triggered and overwhelmed with shame, to the degree that their shame takes center stage, and their partner feels abandoned. Shame spiraling changes the subject from the wounded partner’s wounds to the wounding partner’s shame. There’s absolutely room for healthy guilt when it comes to injuries—guilt feels bad and can contribute to our desire to not repeat the same mistakes—but remember healthy guilt says, “I did something wrong or hurtful,” while shame says, “I am wrong; I am bad.” If you find yourself saying things like “I’m so bad, how could you love me? I’m a terrible partner. You don’t deserve me,” you are shame spiraling.

Also keep in mind that shame spirals aren’t shameful. It’s hard for anyone to stay present when we’re faced with how we’ve hurt someone we love. But for healing to happen, it’s so important to catch them and find your way back to emotional presence. Sometimes the only way to find your way back to emotional presence is to put words to your shame: “This is hard. It brings up so much shame for me. But I’m willing to hold it, so that I can stay present while you say what you need to say,” and then move forward with your supportive role.





Making Excuses


If you’re the wounding partner, whatever led you to do what you did matters, and we can’t ignore it. Eventually you need space to share your experience, too. But making excuses isn’t about sharing what was happening for you; making excuses is about trying to convince your partner not to feel the way they do, or to take some of the heat off yourself. Saying things like “I was trying to get a project done,” or “My assistant was home sick. I was on my own,” or “Traffic was bad,” or “I wouldn’t have cheated if you’d paid more attention to me,” or “How was I supposed to know you needed me right then and there? It wasn’t like I never showed up at all,” especially when you’re interrupting your partner’s process, is likely only going to get in the way of the bigger goal, which is moving forward.





Changing the Subject


Again, if you’re the wounding partner, your feelings do matter. This work is about making sense of the event as a whole… all the moving parts. But we can’t do it all at once. Responses like “But what about my feelings? What about my stress about the project?” or “Am I supposed to walk on eggshells?” or “Some of this is about you being overly sensitive because of your relationship with your mother. This isn’t all about me,” are all examples of changing the subject. If you find yourself trying to change the subject, it’s not because you’re inherently insensitive; it’s your way of managing your painful feelings during this process. But we’re not trying to help you feel better in the moment only for the relationship to stay unhealed; we’re trying for something better.





Trying to Speed Up the Process


Don’t try to rush the conversation or process. Saying “I hear you. But how many times do we have to do this? When can we just move on?” shrinks the space needed for healing, and our goal is to expand the space for healing. We don’t tell a scraped knee to hurry up and heal. Instead we clean it, maybe put a Band-Aid on it, and trust our body to do its thing in its own time. The more space healing has, the more it can do its job.

Keep in mind, healing an attachment injury should never be avoided, but it also can’t be all-encompassing. It shouldn’t be the case that it’s all you talk about until it is resolved. In fact, that approach will likely obstruct healing. Instead, I recommend going in and out of these conversations. As much as possible (depending upon your unique situation), try to enjoy each other outside of healing discussions. Joy is a vulnerable emotion and a bonding one. Strengthening your bond will help with the healing process.

When you are having your healing conversations, if you can steer clear of the common pitfalls outlined above and practice loving listening, empathy, and validation, the discussions will begin to be fewer and farther between. Why? Because when people get what they’re needing, they stop crying for it.





The Wounding Partner: What About You?


The previous sections offer lots of strategies for how the wounding partner can repair with the person they have hurt. They might not be able to right their wrong, but they can use these tactics to help heal and perhaps inspire forgiveness in their partner. But even if you are the person who “wronged” your partner, your feelings matter, too. There is a reason you did whatever you did, so what about your own healing? For a couple to be able to make sense of an attachment injury in a way that fosters understanding and minimizes the chance of it happening again, both partners’ experiences matter. When does your experience get space? It’s all about timing—when your partner feels safe and can take it in, then your experience gets room in these reparative conversations. This can only happen once your partner has felt heard and validated. Being heard and validated creates space and openness for the whole of the experience (understanding the whole experience is not the same as making excuses or justifications). If you’re not sure if your partner is there yet, ask, “Are you in a place where you can understand what was happening for me?” If yes, share your own experience. Here’s how it might sound:

“I’m so sorry I hurt you. I was scared and I put my fear before your need. If I could go back, I would’ve done it differently. It wasn’t my intention to leave you feeling alone. My intention was to run away from my own fear. I recognize this is a pattern for me and it’s rooted in my need to be acceptable to you, to the world, and to myself. My shame and fear of failure got in the way of our connection, and I’m so sorry for that. Can you forgive me?”

This, of course, is just a sample script. Every situation is unique and will lend itself to your unique words. My hope is that you can take the spirit and make it your own.





What If We’re Not Healing?


When it comes to attachment injuries, it’s important to remember that mistrust is a primal response. A survival strategy. It’s not a choice. Sometimes mistrust stems from real relationship events, and sometimes it stems from our own personal blocks to trust, which existed before the relationship even started. Often it’s a combination of the two. Mistrust is the nervous system saying, “There’s a threat. I am not safe. Be careful. Find safety.” In the right context, mistrust can keep us alive. So when there has been an attachment injury in a relationship, you might decide you’re open to healing and that you’re willing to take steps to get there, but ultimately only your nervous system will decide when it’s truly ready to trust again. Trust is a felt sense of safety—it can be worked toward, but not forced; it will only come to be when a partner is open to it, and when the right conditions are created for it to grow.

If you’re putting all of these principles into practice and you’re still saying, “I’m haunted by this event,” “I still don’t fully trust,” “I’m so mad I can’t possibly feel close,” or “We’re putting in the work, but something is still getting in the way,” this means something is blocking the healing process. It could be that there have been multiple injuries on one or both sides, and the relationship is so overwhelmed with injuries that it’s hard for the couple to trust enough to navigate healing conversations.

It might also be the case that the wounding behavior is not ongoing, but the environment that contributed to the wounding behavior is. Let’s take an affair, for example. Most of us will agree that affairs are devastating to relationships. At the same time, we might also agree that affairs typically don’t materialize out of thin air—they are often (not always) related to a struggling relationship climate. If both partners want to heal from an affair, there needs to be an openness to looking beyond the affair itself and into the overall climate. This might mean that while the partner who was cheated on is the critically wounded partner, we eventually need to make space for the wounding partner’s hurts, too.

Consider Ayla and Ari, who were trying to heal from an affair when I began seeing them. Long before the affair, chronic negative cycles were leaving them both feeling shamed, invalidated, rejected, unwanted, and unappreciated, among a host of other unmet attachment needs that bogged down their closeness and their ability to get along. While these smaller ruptures weren’t as instantly devastating or visible, they were real. At some point each partner needed to have space to share their experience and be heard and validated. It didn’t sound like “I’m sorry I had an affair, but I was unhappy and if I wasn’t unhappy I wouldn’t have been so vulnerable to falling into the arms of my coworker.” Instead it sounded like “I chose to have an affair. You and our relationship problems didn’t make me choose to handle our problems in that way. At the same time, I have some hurts of my own and it will help me feel closer if we can talk about it, not as a way to take away from your pain, but as a way to fully heal our relationship.” This communication happened deep into the process, when trust was more firmly established because we first had to deal with the more pressing issue of the wronged individual’s hurt.

Think of it like waking up in the middle of the night to water seeping in from a leaky roof. You might get the roof patched, which will work for a while and prevent further damage, but eventually you’ll need to address why the roof was compromised to the point of leaking to begin with. Otherwise, another problem with the roof is eventually going to show itself. This logic can be applied not just to affairs, but to attachment injuries of all natures.

Sometimes one or both partners aren’t sure they really want to heal. They go along with it because it seems like the “right” thing to do, or because they’re afraid to be alone. They have one foot in and one foot out of the process. When I have a couple that’s stuck and I can’t figure out why, much of the time it’s because one partner isn’t entirely sure they want to go on. If you suspect this might be the case, as hard as it will be, it’s important to talk about it. Remember, all the work outlined in this book requires authenticity and vulnerability. The healing process is no exception; it requires full engagement. Without it, your relationship will get stuck in a stale state of limbo.

Some wounded partners find that no matter how they want it, they just can’t find a place of forgiveness. Their wounding partner has shown up for them in the best way possible, but still their anger and resentment linger. They might even genuinely believe the injurious behavior won’t happen again, but the block remains. What this might be about, on a subconscious level, is how the wounded partner will feel about themself if they forgive. They could associate (again, subconsciously) forgiveness with being weak, unworthy, a victim, less-than, and/or humiliated, all of which are shame-based. For them, holding on to the anger that blocks forgiveness can keep them safe from their own shame. Or, holding on to anger might keep them safe from how they might view themselves if they take ownership for their part of relationship problems. If you can relate, it’s something to explore and work through.

Finally, some behaviors stem from personal issues on the part of one or both partners, like addiction, and healing can’t happen until it’s fully addressed. For example, if a partner who has an affair has an untreated sex addiction, the odds are higher that without treatment it will continue to be a problem. In these instances, there are professionals who usher couples through a formal healing program in conjunction with the addicted partner’s treatment. If there’s a substance abuse problem, we’re going to see any number of behaviors associated with addictions: lying, legal problems, draining the bank account to keep up with their use. Anyone in the painful throes of addiction is likely to be causing serious injuries to the relationship, and sadly, it will take help for them or the relationship to heal.

If you can relate to any of these common blocks and you’ve tried to address them but your relationship still isn’t improving, it’s time to seek professional help. Attachment injuries can be especially delicate, and sometimes the best way to attend to them is by getting an outside perspective. This does not mean you’re broken, weak, not trying hard enough, or that all is lost. It just means that you’re experiencing more relationship complications than you can handle on your own—and trust me when I say you are not alone.

Lastly, some wounds cannot be healed. Sometimes the pain is too much. Sometimes the betrayal is so great that it’s impossible for trust to ever be rebuilt and closeness to ever be regained. Sometimes there are too many wounds. Sometimes a partner’s behaviors were too much of a breach of your value system. If the repair process is going as smoothly as possible, you’re having the right conversations and the behavior is ended and communication is improving and you’ve given it time and still you’re blocked, then you might want to consider the possibility that there’s too much to overcome. There’s no shame in admitting that sometimes trusting your partner again isn’t possible. If you think this is the case, I highly recommend seeking a professional to help you talk it through.





Moving Beyond the Injury


How do you know when you’ve healed? As I’ve mentioned, healing attachment injuries is a process rather than a one-time event. What I see with couples in my practice is that during our sessions the attachment injury stops being the focus of the conversation. Does their relationship go back to “normal”? No. Relationships that successfully heal from attachment injuries will never be exactly as they were again. Instead, they’ll be better because the process of working through injuries is one of deepening connection, personal growth, and relationship growth. What I’ve experienced is that couples who make it through come out on the other side stronger than ever.





PART THREE

Real-World Considerations





CHAPTER 10 Workable Intruders

When You or Your Partner Struggles with Depression, Trauma, or Addictions




In order to achieve secure love, you and your partner need four basic criteria: 1) commitment, 2) access to actionable information, 3) the ability to self-regulate, and 4) the willingness to consistently do your part to foster an attachment-friendly environment. Since you’ve read the book this far, that indicates your commitment. It also goes a long way in helping you access the actionable information. But to integrate this information effectively, you need to be able to stay regulated and emotionally present. Your ability to self-regulate and/or emotionally engage in your relationship can be drastically impaired by mental health and addiction issues, and if you have a partner who struggles with these issues, that can impede a connection between you.

My ultimate goal for every couple is to enable them to maintain an attachment-friendly environment as much of the time as possible and co-regulate each other through ruptures. To get there, you each need the capacity to be self-regulated enough to show up as your best self most of the time.

Staying regulated and present is never as easy as simply saying, “I’m going to stay regulated and present.” Both take targeted skills (many of which we’ve discussed in this book) and practice. But some people will have a harder time practicing and implementing these skills than others, often because additional challenges interfere. I call these challenges “workable intruders,” and they include (but are not limited to) excessive stress, depression, a history of trauma, and addictions.





Excessive Stress


Stress is distracting and energy draining. While most people probably have more stress in their lives than they’d like, some have excessive stress: more than what is manageable without seriously compromising the energy and time needed to devote to self-care and relationship care. If you have to put out fires all day with no break, it makes it that much harder to do what you need to do to prevent the fires in the first place.

For most people, the root of excessive stress is related to finances, parenting, discrimination, taking care of aging relatives, work-related challenges, medical conditions, relationships, socioeconomic issues, or a combination of these. Regardless of the source, such stress is going to make it harder to work on your relationship. But know that by improving the quality of interactions with your partner, you will reduce stress.

Most people don’t have the opportunity to overhaul their lives to reduce stress significantly in the short term. Still, usually we can come up with something, even if it’s small. Do you have the ability to work a little less? Can you add in a ten-minute walk twice a day to move your body and reboot your brain? Can you get into bed an hour earlier? Can you practice breathing exercises five minutes per day? Is there any other action that can take the edge off your stress levels in order to open up a little space to focus on relationship work (even just being more mindful of the tone you use with your partner)?

Some people don’t have the luxury of making significant changes to the logistical realities of their lives. I understand that. If this is you, see if you can at least take a couple of pauses throughout the day to do three-minute breathing exercises. These will help you ground yourself and be more mindful during interactions with your partner. The smallest pause in the day can help both you and your relationship.

Sometimes three minutes of relaxing breathing at 2 p.m. can impact your reaction to your partner’s annoying text at 2:25 p.m. When you get home that day, you might not have time to cuddle on the couch because you’re working two jobs and don’t get home until too late. But when your partner gives you a hug when you walk through the door, maybe, just maybe, it has something to do with the fact that you took the time to breathe for three minutes, which helped you just enough to refrain from responding to their text with a cynical tone, which was co-regulating to your partner (or at least didn’t add bad energy to the mix), and in turn the hug was co-regulating for you. Will you sleep a little better that night without tension between the two of you? How might a good night’s sleep affect your ability to manage stress the next day? Small moments add up.

What about when your partner has excessive stress and isn’t available in the relationship fully? I don’t want to take away from how lonely it can feel when your partner isn’t present. Even when it’s a situation entirely out of their control and intellectually you understand that, it’s still frustrating. Of course it is… you miss them and have limited control over the situation. But you aren’t powerless. While you might not be able to take the circumstances surrounding their stress away, you can be an emotionally supportive presence while they’re in the thick of it, which will reduce the overall stress load. If you’re the partner experiencing the stressful event, it’s important to allow space for your partner’s frustration without getting defensive. This might sound like a simple “I understand how hard this is on you, too, and I appreciate you being by my side.” This is not to take away from your experience, but it will be much easier for your partner to tolerate situations they can’t control when they feel seen for how the situation impacts them, too.

Relationship problems make up at least 30 percent of the average American’s stress. So while your stress is real, and I want to validate that some of you can barely keep your heads above water, even the tiniest of actions that will add to an attachment-friendly environment can help reduce stress in an entire one-third of your life.





Depression


Depression robs a person of energy and motivation, leaving them feeling numb, agitated, excessively guilty, often with a lower sex drive, and/or with their concentration inhibited. If you or your partner is depressed, just getting through the day can be a struggle, which means you might have very little left to give to the relationship. If you are depressed, you might not be able to concentrate on conversations about your own or your partner’s attachment needs. Your pain is so big, and your motivation so low, that you cannot give your partner what they’re needing no matter how much the “real you,” underneath the dark cloud of depression, wants to.

Imagine a voice inside your head that says, “Everything is your fault.” You feel sad and unmotivated and maybe even scared; or maybe you just feel numb. Everything seems dark and hopeless, and those feelings consume you. Then your partner comes home and wants to connect, but you have nothing to give. Now the voice in your head telling you it’s your fault, that you’re a letdown, gets even louder. All you can do is cry, or maybe just shut off. Often depressed clients don’t have the emotional capacity to do anything but survive. Even mild depression can be enough of a disruption to your functioning to prevent you from showing up with your full self.

Depression, when not fully understood and talked about, can worsen attachment insecurity. If the depressed partner hasn’t been diagnosed, it can leave both partners feeling alone, hurt, scared, and confused. But when someone’s depression is diagnosed and they get treatment, the couple can make sense of what’s happening and begin the road to recovery.

If you suffer from depression, ideally your first course of action will be to get professional help from a therapist, psychiatrist, or medical doctor. Second, keep in mind the importance of quality connections with others and how it can dramatically improve depression. Attachment-friendly environments are built on the foundation that the space is safe for connection. These environments encourage the release of happy hormones such as oxytocin, and neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine—the very neurotransmitters targeted in the drugs that treat depression. So even if you’re feeling depressed and the last thing you want to do is funnel energy into connecting with anyone, including your partner, do what you can when you can. Even a tiny amount of engagement can make a difference.

The same skill of sharing your experience that goes into tackling a negative cycle can help when you’re dealing with depression: Talk about it with your partner. Let them in. Help them understand your feelings of sadness, guilt, lethargy, and why you’re having trouble putting effort into the relationship. Let them see what you’re going through. Your partner needs to know that you do care about improving the relationship, even if you’re having trouble doing the work. If you two can talk about the real, raw parts of yourselves and your life, like depression, you’ll feel connected. Sharing is connection, even when sharing the hard stuff.

If your partner is the one who’s depressed, it only makes sense that you feel alone and likely out of control of the situation. Try to understand that they are dealing with an illness and that their behavior is not a rejection of you. Providing an attachment-friendly environment that is validating and not shaming is something you can control and, believe it or not, is likely to make more of a difference than anything else you can do. Self-care is part of an attachment-friendly environment. Make sure you are attending to your basic needs, like a healthy diet, exercise, sleep, and finding support from others. Maybe seek out a therapist who can help you learn to attend to your own needs while also navigating the relationship. It’s easy to neglect ourselves when a loved one is suffering, but over time it takes a toll on both you and the person who is struggling.

For both partners to better understand depression in the context of your relationship and how to find ways to maintain your bond, I recommend the book When Depression Hurts Your Relationship: How to Regain Intimacy and Reconnect with Your Partner When You’re Depressed, by Shannon Kolakowski, PsyD, and Craig Malkin, PhD.





Other Mental Illnesses and Personality Disorders


While depression is common, it is by no means the only mental health issue which can add a layer of complexity to relationship work. If you or your partner is struggling with bipolar, an anxiety disorder, any other form of mental illness, neurodivergence, and/or a personality disorder such as Narcissistic Personality Disorder or Borderline Personality Disorder (both of which overlap with attachment insecurity and trauma, and pose unique challenges to relationship work), it’s important to seek professional help and additional resources.





Unresolved Trauma


Often when we think about unresolved trauma, we call to mind serious events like sexual or physical abuse, or death of an attachment figure. Most people don’t need to be convinced that these experiences can be enormously emotionally damaging, and for good reason. What often get missed are the smaller or chronic events that, if never properly processed, also manifest in ways that affect our well-being and relationship health. I often liken those events to a thousand paper cuts—individually they don’t seem like such a big deal, but cumulatively they have a major effect.

Unresolved trauma is a more encompassing bucket than you might think and affects more individuals than you might imagine. I regularly work with clients who grew up being subtly emotionally abused, constantly being told things like “if you don’t stop crying, I’ll give you something to cry about,” or “girls are prettier when they’re quiet,” or “boys don’t cry.” These phrases represent emotional trauma because they send the message that you aren’t safe to feel or show your feelings… if you do, you’ll be rejected, shamed, sent away, or even physically harmed. Second, it communicates that you aren’t even valuable enough to have a voice. These messages fuel self-beliefs that show up in relationship problems throughout life in ways that are often so below the radar that it takes a trained professional to connect the dots.

A highly critical, shaming environment is the perfect breeding ground for the type of trauma I’m describing, which is called complex post-traumatic stress disorder (CPTSD). If you can relate, you might recognize that in your relationship today you’ll go to great lengths to avoid the sting of shame you grew up with. Let’s say you get a flat tire and realize you don’t have a jack and you forgot to renew your AAA membership. The shame wells up inside you, saying, “How could you be so stupid?” This in turn spurs you to snap and lash out at your partner, not because they’re at fault but because you’ll do anything to deflect the heat that you’ve put on yourself. Remember, shame tells us to hide the parts of us we don’t believe are acceptable to others, so when you don’t like being seen as incompetent, or viewing yourself as incompetent, it can feel so much safer to project the incompetence onto someone else, even when this is far from your conscious intention. Your nervous system only knows that it’s trying to feel better. But unfortunately the damage is done and your partner feels stunned and attacked, which, depending on how your partner reacts, can incite your negative cycle.

That is a trauma reaction. Someone who didn’t grow up with excessive shame will likely not snap. They will likely not shame-spiral and call themselves stupid. Instead, they’ll be annoyed with themselves, handle the situation, and make sure they pack the jack and renew AAA as soon as possible, calling it all a valuable learning experience.

Now instead of shame, substitute in traumas related to attachment fears and needs, like emotional invalidation. This kind of emotional abandonment (and invalidation is emotional abandonment), when repeated enough during one’s formative years, will cause an overarching fear of abandonment. So when your partner doesn’t text back after five minutes and you start to feel panicky, convinced they’re purposely ignoring you because they don’t love you anymore? That’s trauma.

What about physical or sexual trauma? These “big-T” traumas can have a profound impact on their victims. This is especially true when they’re combined with a generally toxic environment, which is quite often the case. The same is true for PTSD resulting from acute crises such as accidents, being a victim of a crime, natural disasters, and military-related events. PTSD can shake up a person’s sense of safety, causing hair-trigger reactions to anything in their environment that might remind them of the traumatizing events. It can cause nightmares and other sleep disturbances, intrusive thoughts, flashbacks, mood swings, and so much more. Being emotionally present when bogged down with trauma symptoms can be so difficult, which is why PTSD not related to your relationship can still have a major impact on your relationship.

Some traumas will need more help healing than others. When I’m sitting across from couples in a session, I can tell this is happening when a partner isn’t able to relax into the work we’re doing together. For some this shows up as detachment. For others it shows as externalized dysregulation manifesting in escalated emotional outbursts, difficulty staying on topic, lengthy protests, and rants that are more persistent than usual. Many partners, including those without significant trauma histories, will be triggered by therapy especially when painful feelings are at an all-time high. But by providing the safe and validating environment which it’s my job to create, both partners will almost always feel heard, and then settle in. When that’s not the case, and the trauma in the room is bigger than my ability to contain it, I know it’s time for this person to seek help to specifically relieve trauma symptoms. Somatic Experiencing therapy, a type of therapy that is meant to help you feel, process, and manage your feelings as they show up in your body, is a good addition or alternative to traditional talk therapy for the healing of trauma, and I recommend it highly to those who have trouble fully participating in couples work.

While somatic therapy is by no means the only option for healing trauma, it can offer you a break from overrelying on your mind and the invaluable opportunity to start learning from the intelligence of your body. Many people get a lot from talk therapy and then move into somatic therapy when they’re ready to address the trauma more deeply. Somatic Experiencing therapists are trained to help people process trauma without getting flooded, or overwhelmed, with emotions and unable to “turn them off” when the session is over, which makes the trauma healing more comfortable and less re-traumatizing. It can be more effective for those who haven’t been able to heal in other types of therapy. On top of this, somatic therapy is designed to help people self-regulate not just when they’re actively processing trauma, but when they’re facing the everyday challenges of life and relationships. Being able to self-regulate and find calm within can help a person tremendously when they need that extra bit of support to be able to settle into the work, self-regulate, and stop negative cycles. You can find more about this type of work by visiting www.traumahealing.org.

There’s a lot to be said for the ability of attachment-friendly environments to contribute significantly to healing trauma. The shame of trauma says “you aren’t worthy of love and care,” but secure relationships and attachment-friendly environments send consistent messages through words and behavior that “you are worthy of love and care.” Additionally, when couples can reduce the frequency and intensity of negative cycles, their home environment feels safer. Safety is the antidote to fear, which is a driving force behind trauma triggers. When environmental stress is decreased, the trauma victim (whether you, your partner, or both of you) will have more energy freed up to devote to their individual healing. For this reason, relationship work is a vital component of trauma healing. To better understand the healing power fulfilling relationships can bring to trauma treatment, I recommend both partners read The Body Keeps the Score, by Bessel van der Kolk.





Addictions


It will probably come as no surprise that substance abuse and other addictions will get in the way of a partner’s ability to fully show up in their relationship in the healthiest way possible, much less to be able to put new relationship skills to use. Addictions create competing attachments because access to the object of the addiction takes priority over the relationship. Drugs and alcohol alter consciousness, in which case the real person is hidden underneath the intoxication. Porn and sex addiction create competing attachments and sexual betrayal.

Getting treatment for substance abuse and addictions is so important. If you have an addiction, you have a real relationship with the activity or substance to which you’re addicted, and it will be impossible for you to be fully present in the human relationships that matter most to you, including the one with yourself, until you can cut off or deprioritize the relationship with your vice of choice. But, as science has taught us, cutting that relationship off will be a lot easier if those human relationships are strong.





Rat Park


In the 1970s, drug researchers proved that rats put in small cages alone would, when offered a choice between heroin- or cocaine-laced water or regular water, drink only from the drug-laced bottles until they overdosed or died.

Shortly after these studies, American psychologist Bruce Alexander introduced a new idea that he decided to put to the test with a new version of the rat lab tests. Giving the rats the same choice between drug-laced water or regular water, Alexander added an additional variable: this time the rats weren’t alone in a small cage. Alexander created Rat Park. In Rat Park, the rats were surrounded by many other rats, and they could play and socialize all they wanted (rats, like humans, are highly social animals). This time, the Rat Park rats did not prefer the drug-laced water; they preferred the plain water. Those rats who did try the drug water only did so intermittently and never overdosed, and never at the expense of food and regular water. Even the rats brought over from the solitary cages who were near death tapered themselves off the drug water and fully recovered from their addiction.

Rat Park taught us that addiction is about much more than chemical dependency; it’s also about connection—or a lack of connection. Those who are isolated—and poor relationships are a form of isolation—are missing out on the ability to experience fulfilling connections with other humans. Without connection two things happen: one, a void develops that needs to be filled, and it can be filled by anything that can duplicate the pleasure that comes from connection; two, pain and problems, particularly shame, intensify and so people need to self-medicate to mediate these painful feelings.

The Rat Park study was specifically about addiction, but the logic of Rat Park applies to all the information in this chapter. The same poor relationship environments that play a role in causing and perpetuating addictions are associated with stress and mental illness, so it stands to reason that improved relationships can go a long way in the treatment of all of it.

If you’re struggling with addiction, my advice is to work on your addiction and on your relationship, to the degree to which that is possible. Of course there will be situations when healing from an addiction will leave no room for anything else. In that case there’s room for flexibility and prioritizing the short-term need to focus solely on healing the addiction. But when it comes to long-term healing, there is nothing more you can do to ensure recovery than create and foster connections.

If your partner is struggling with an addiction, you probably feel alone in the relationship and can relate to conflicting feelings and a sense of helplessness. If you’d like to learn about providing support to them and yourself in a way that encourages healthy boundaries and self-care, and is from an attachment perspective, I’d recommend the book Beyond Addiction: How Science and Kindness Help People Change, by Jeffrey Foote.

As I close this chapter, please know that I’ve by no means addressed all of the extenuating circumstances in life that can make it more difficult to learn and put into practice healthier relationship skills. I’ve only included the most common, but I’ve worked with very few couples who don’t have something going on in their lives that add a twist to the work. When I work with clients, my mantra is to meet them where they are and try to help them move forward. Whatever your struggles in life, try to do the same… meet yourself and your partner where you are, challenges and all, do the best you can with the capacity you do have, and focus on moving forward to the best of your ability.





CHAPTER 11 The Sex Factor





Sexual connection provides a uniquely powerful bond between partners. Of course there are always exceptions to the rule, but statistically speaking, couples with great sex lives report the greatest overall relationship satisfaction. It can be easy to take this as “if you want to be a happier couple, improve your sex life,” and sometimes that might work. But the truth is there are many layers to a couple’s sexual relationship and what needs to be addressed for one couple to see improvements won’t always work for the next couple. But we do know this: improving the attachment climate of the relationship is a must, because the only way conversations about creating a happier sex life can possibly go forward is when they can happen outside of a negative communication cycle.

Before diving in, I need to put it out there that when a couple is struggling with their sex life, the very first place any therapist or doctor will start is to have them seek medical testing to rule out problems such as hormonal imbalances, infections, erectile dysfunction, bladder problems, diabetes, cardiovascular problems, and any number of other medical issues that can contribute to pain and low sex drive. Luckily there are treatments, but first you need to know there’s a problem, so if you haven’t taken that step, start there. And if your problems aren’t medically related, or aren’t entirely medically related, let’s talk about what else might be going on.

By now you know all too well that negative cycles wreak havoc on relationships. They damage emotional closeness and block harmony. It probably comes as no surprise that another very significant side effect of negative communication cycles is damage to a couple’s sex life. While there are couples who manage to have great sex lives even when they’re struggling with communication and insecure-attachment issues, these couples are the exception, not the rule. For some couples, their sexual relationship gets so caught up in their negative cycle that it takes on a negative cycle of its own—now, in addition to their negative communication cycle, they also find themselves in a negative sex cycle.

Most of the couples I treat tell me that at the beginning of their relationship they had good, or even great, sex lives. While it’s easy to assume that life circumstances like kids or career get in the way of a couple maintaining a healthy sex life, in my experience and according to research, more secure couples tend to maintain sexual aliveness in spite of their life circumstances (within reason).





The Importance of Physical Connection


From the day you were born, you derived emotional support via touch. Soothing touch from your parents sent messages such as “you are valuable,” “you are loved,” “you are safe,” “you are not alone.” Touch soothes the nervous system. Touch is so important to babies that they will fail to thrive and sometimes even die when they don’t get enough human touch. This is why skin-to-skin contact is one of the very first acts of bonding between parents and infants after they’re born.

Two years ago, my grandma died at the age of ninety-six. I was very close to her, and I had the privilege of being by her side when she passed. By the time I made the cross-country trip to be with her, she was no longer able to speak. I stayed by my grandmother’s side for her final days, wiping her forehead with cold washcloths, holding her hand, even curling up in bed with her. I created a makeshift “double bed” by fully extending a recliner, bumping up against her nursing home bed, and lowering the rail. This way, when I had to sleep, I could still hold her hand. Yes, I talked to her, too, but I sensed that touch was just as critical an emotional comfort during what was probably a scary time. She could not talk to me, but she could communicate through touch. When I held her hand, she squeezed mine back, and my touch helped her relax, just like it helped me relax to sleep in her arms when I was a tiny baby.

From cradle to grave, humans need physical connection. Touch is as valid and worthy a means to emotional connection as words are, and sex is no exception.

All types of touch between partners is important. Nonsexual touch, like holding hands, cuddling on the couch on a rainy day, and giving a hug when we say goodbye, all powerfully communicate love and safety. But sexual touch is different. While all touch releases bonding chemicals like oxytocin, dopamine, and endorphins, sexual touch does so exponentially.

Sex is also vulnerable. It’s one of the most vulnerable things we can do in our relationships, because it requires us to show up with our full selves. As we know, vulnerability reigns supreme when it comes to bonding. During a positive sexual experience, each partner gets the message “I see all of you and I not only accept you, but I treasure you.” And that message is delivered every bit as powerfully as if it were spoken aloud. Sexual connection is a way to feel chosen and special, and its existence, to the degree it is desired by each partner, is crucial.





Sex in an Anxious-Avoidant Pairing


As I mentioned in chapter 3, the pairing of an anxious partner and an avoidant partner is very common, and perhaps the second most likely pairing to “succeed,” after a couple with a secure attachment. This is due, as we know, to the balance in the relationship—one partner is going to turn the heat up, the other is more likely to cool things off; one partner is trying to close the distance by bringing up problems, the other is trying to keep things from getting worse by pushing away conflict. When their opposite strategies collide time and again and the couple becomes bogged down with negative communication cycles, their sex life can easily become collateral damage. Good sex requires connection and vulnerability, and negative cycles degrade connection and discourage vulnerability. They leave anxious partners feeling emotionally neglected, and leave avoidant partners feeling like failures, neither of which creates a recipe for a healthy sex life.

Early in relationships, anxious partners are more likely to seek out sex as a way to feel loved. But as the relationship progresses, when an anxious partner feels like their emotions in the relationship aren’t being tended to or validated, they might become less likely to want to engage in physical closeness and are more likely to turn down sex. Some avoidant partners are, by virtue of their avoidance, emotionally distant during sex. While at the beginning of the relationship the anxious partner might tolerate this, as time goes on they might start desiring more engagement during sex and “asking for more.” If the avoidant partner fears being viewed as a failure and/or already feels like they can’t get anything right in other areas of the relationship, the last thing they want to do is feel like a failure in the bedroom, too. To manage the layers of tension, the couple may avoid sex altogether until one day they realize it’s been months or even years since they’ve had sex, at which point it might feel awkward to try again.

Another common scenario between anxious and avoidant partners is that one partner becomes the sexual pursuer and the other becomes the sexual withdrawer. The pursue-withdraw dynamic is one we’ve seen in this book many times over. When it comes to sex, there is sometimes a role reversal where the avoidant partner is the sexual pursuer and the anxious partner is the sexual withdrawer. It makes sense when you think about it: avoidant partners are less connected to their emotions, which makes it difficult for them to connect intimately by talking about feelings and needs. To make up for that deficit, a lot of avoidant partners feel emotionally connected through sex and physical connection (even when they appear on the surface to be detached). Sex provides the sensory stimulation on which they often thrive, and can even help them get their attachment needs met. When their partner is sexually responsive, it’s as if they are being told, “You’re valuable, you’re a successful partner.” If an avoidant partner isn’t getting the kind of connection that helps them feel filled up, they often distance from the relationship in other ways.

Anxious partners, on the other hand, can be more verbal than their avoidant partners, and intimacy via words and gestures comes more easily to them. While everyone is unique in the way they feel loved, verbal expressions of love, emotional validation, and supportive gestures that say “I’m here for you” are almost always going to leave an anxious partner feeling loved, valued, and seen. When an anxious partner isn’t getting enough of the kind of connection that fills them up, and maybe even feels resentful of the fact that their needs aren’t being met, they can become less interested in sex or view sex as transactional.

It’s not always the case that the avoidant partner is the sexual pursuer and the anxious partner is the sexual withdrawer. Sometimes the same patterns in the other three Cs of the relationship (cooperation, conflict, and comfort) play out similarly in the sexual relationship (which falls in the category of connection). But regardless of who plays what role, in a sexual pursue-withdraw dynamic, the sexual pursuer is in the rigid position of almost exclusively initiating sex, while the sexual withdrawer rigidly evades the pursuer’s advances. Neither is acting as a whole sexual self who takes balanced responsibility for the sexual climate of the relationship. It’s not abnormal in any relationship for one partner to have a higher sex drive than the other, but a sexual pursue-withdraw dynamic is much more rigid and exaggerated. Neither the sexual pursuer nor the withdrawer is good or bad, right or wrong. Still, they’ve created a dance of intimacy that feeds on itself. They’ve created a negative cycle devoted specifically to sex, and anything that gets tied up in a negative cycle fails to thrive.

This is exactly what happened to my clients Monique and Dietlef. Early in their relationship, they had a great sex life. In fact, their sexual chemistry played a big role in their decision to get married. Both of them grew up with parents who weren’t happily married or physically affectionate, so in both of their minds good sex was a sign that the relationship was thriving. As time went by, like a lot of couples, they started bickering more often. The content of their arguments changed as their relationship evolved. First it was wedding planning, which evolved into in-law problems, which evolved into all the problems that can arise when two people make a home and life together. Nothing was abnormal about their challenges, but when they couldn’t see eye to eye, they easily slipped into negative cycles. Their negative cycles weren’t particularly intense or frequent, but the distance they created was enough to take a toll on their sex life. Monique unintentionally adapted to her feelings by losing interest in sex. Dietlef, also without conscious intention, adapted to the disappointment of not getting his attachment needs met by pushing harder for sex and making protests—sex, for him, felt like the only way to experience emotional connection. Monique would often go along with sex even when she didn’t want to because she genuinely wanted Dietlef to be happy, but in doing so she started to think of sex as a chore, which made her even less interested. Being a good partner was also important to Dietlef—he wanted Monique to be happy—but their attachment issues got in the way of being able to fully connect. Eventually their sex life settled into a sexual limbo. The only reason they ever had sex was that Dietlef continued to pursue, and Monique continued to go along with it, at least enough to keep her husband from feeling entirely deprived. Some couples, however, give up altogether. Monique and Dietlef had unintentionally co-created a negative sex cycle.

When negative sex cycles are deeply entrenched, sex is no longer associated with bonding, fun, and pleasure and instead becomes about pressure, shame, and fear—none of which is a turn-on. The good news? Sure, negative communication cycles outside of sex can cause negative cycles inside of sex, but the reverse is also true. Getting a handle on negative cycles in other parts of the relationship can go a long way in improving negative sex cycles. When Monique and Dietlef started learning how to manage their negative cycles around things like chores, reaching for emotional connection, and how they spent their time on weekends—all of which were hot topics for them—they started to feel closer, and instead of the “heat” being tied up in arguments, it naturally transferred over and their sex life got, well, hotter.





The Sexual Stalemate


One partner wanting more sex than the other isn’t uncommon and isn’t a problem in itself. Issues arise only when this dynamic isn’t managed, or if one partner (usually the one less interested in sex) tries to get their needs met by using the mismatch to their advantage, especially if they are feeling shortchanged in another part of the relationship. What does this sexual stalemate look like? “You don’t deserve sexual connection unless I’m getting enough verbal connection (or support in whatever way is relevant for the partner).” Using sex as a bargaining chip to get what you want from your partner is not an approach that will help you find the relationship you’re longing for. If you do enjoy sex, my hope is that you don’t deny yourself in an effort to deny your partner.

Early in my career, before I started exclusively working with couples, I treated a woman in her mid-fifties who told me that for years she resisted sex with her partner because the relationship had problems she resented. She didn’t want him to get what he wanted while she wasn’t getting what she wanted. Then one day, she thought to herself, “If I choose not to have sex, I might be depriving my husband, but I’m also depriving me,” and after that she started having sex with her husband. No, it didn’t cure their relationship. But they both enjoyed it, and it gave the two of them something to bond over. It certainly didn’t make things worse.

Am I saying that you should ignore relationship problems and try to fix them with sex, or encouraging you to override your sensibilities and have sex even when you absolutely can’t stand the idea? No! But there are some situations where it actually can be helpful to put your differences aside and have fun with each other. And what if that fun ends up bleeding over into other parts of the relationship and makes things better?

If you can relate to a sex stalemate in your relationship it’s important to start talking about it (without letting the conversation slip into a negative cycle, of course). This is true whether you are the sexual pursuer, sexual withdrawer, male, female, gay, straight, trans, or however else you choose to define yourself. You might try to start with simply stating the facts: “We’re in a sex stalemate and it’s getting in the way of our closeness. Do you think we can try to honor each other’s needs while still honoring our own? How can we meet in the middle?” Think of this as a way to open space for deeper conversations instead of questions with hard answers. This is more about planting seeds of new dialogue than it is about finding instant resolution. If you’ve followed the advice in this book up to this point and you’re able to have attachment-friendly conversations, the kind that prevent negative cycles, you might find that you’re able to get somewhere new. And a lot of times when couples start up a conversation about sex, it ends with… sex.





Working on Your Sex Cycle


Let’s go back to Monique and Dietlef. While they worked hard to stabilize their negative cycle outside of sex, which was enormously helpful in rebuilding their bond, they also did some work specifically on their sex cycle. To start, Dietlef started backing off his tendency to sexually pursue. When one partner is the pursuer, that partner is taking on all of the sexual responsibility in the relationship, which often doesn’t allow enough space for the withdrawing partner to recognize or be in touch with their own sexual needs. The more Monique lost touch with her needs, the less longing she had for sex. So I encouraged them to do what I would encourage any couple to do when dealing with any negative cycle: break the established cycle by doing something new. Instead of habitually continuing to push away sex, Monique took the initiative to learn about and celebrate her sexual side. She worked to become more comfortable talking about sex, and began to take ownership of her own sexual needs. Gradually their sex found a healthier, and much more fulfilling, level of balance.





Get Comfortable Being Uncomfortable


I recommend that any couple struggling in their sex life do similar work to Monique and Dietlef. The core problems will be different for each couple, but the solution will always start with each partner’s willingness to be vulnerable. For Monique and Dietlef that looked like being vulnerable enough to have uncomfortable conversations and vulnerable enough to move out of their comfort zones in order to shake up the status quo… which is what ultimately opened the door to change.

While it’s common for couples’ blocks to be rooted in negative cycles, many other factors can get in the way of a healthy sex life. You or your partner could also carry a lot of discomfort around sex for various reasons. Certified sex therapists specialize in understanding the complicated world of sex and can bring understanding to sexual problems far faster than what a couple can learn by trial and error.

While this book provides the structure for creating attachment-friendly environments, which will in turn create space for connecting and having emotionally safe conversations, sex is a topic with its own twist: even people who are comfortable having sex can be uncomfortable talking about sex. Creating secure love requires vulnerability, including the vulnerability to ask uncomfortable questions and even to talk about the discomfort itself, because the deepest moments of bonding happen when we open up about our discomfort.

Instead of pushing through conversations about sex in spite of being uncomfortable, be transparent about the fact that it’s uncomfortable for you to talk so directly about sex because of the messages you received, or didn’t receive, growing up that may have contributed to your discomfort. Maybe you got the message that getting aroused is shameful and not to be talked about, and this got in the way of your ability to embrace your sexuality. Whatever your insecurities are, it’s vulnerable to put words to them and vulnerability is bonding.

If you’re on the receiving end of your partner’s disclosures about their sexual insecurities, be sure to be emotionally available and validating. If you’re this far into the book, you’ve learned how to be supportive… use those skills. Tell your partner you understand them, and that their insecurities make sense to you and why: “Of course you feel uncomfortable talking about sex if you grew up being led to believe it’s something to be ashamed of. Anybody would.” Understanding and validation create emotional intimacy and emotional intimacy is a sexual turn-on.

If you’re the sharing partner, tell your partner if there’s anything they can say to help you with your discomfort around sex. This part is so important because when couples communicate acceptance of each other, especially in areas where shame is being held (whether it’s related to sex or not), they build security and help each other reverse old negative belief systems. You might ask, “Can you reassure me that you accept the sexual part of me and you don’t see me as shameful?” This is just one example. Some people who grew up believing that sex was “dirty” might need to know their partner can want them sexually and still respect them. Some might need to know their partner doesn’t view their sex drive as threatening. Some might need to know that they’re still sexually desirable in their partner’s eyes even after they’ve become a parent. Too many couples carry around sexual insecurities without sharing them with their partner, forever walking around with the assumption that what they fear is true.

Keep in mind that when having intentional, exploratory conversations about sex, especially given how sensitive a topic sex is for some couples, all the basic rules of attachment-friendly environments apply. Stay far away from blame, which might sound like “I’m not happy with our sex life because you make me feel insecure,” or “I don’t understand. All of my exes were comfortable with their bodies.” Stay away from criticism: “You’re doing it all wrong,” “Why can’t you just enjoy it?” Most important, stay far, far away from shame, which might sound like something along the lines of “You like that? Ew, that’s weird,” or any comment that might leave your partner feeling shamed for or embarrassed by their sexual preferences.





Managing the Pain of Sexual Rejection


Sex creates a lot of room for feelings of rejection. Those who find themselves in the role of sexual pursuer, for example, sometimes feel deprived of the opportunity to be pursued, leaving them feeling unwanted. If you’re feeling unwanted, broach the conversation directly and from a place of self. Instead of “you never initiate sex!” try “I feel sexually unfulfilled. I don’t feel wanted and to feel good in the relationship I need to know I’m wanted and that my needs matter to you. I need for us to be able to talk about it.” If you’re the receiving partner, be sure to do just that: hear, understand, and validate before responding with your feelings and perspective about the situation.

Then what? Well, then you try to shine light on the barriers and work through them: What’s driving the lack of pursuing? You might already have a hunch about what’s getting in the way of your sexual connection and it’s just a matter of beginning to put words to it. Here are some common themes I see in my practice when working with couples who feel stuck:

If you’re the sexual pursuer, aside from feeling unwanted because you aren’t pursued, you might also feel the sting of rejection when your withdrawing significant other pushes sex away. It can be tempting to take the withdrawal as a personal rejection, one that’s isolated from overall attachment insecurity in the relationship. Once again, the goal is for you to put on your attachment lens: What is my partner’s withdrawal really saying? Are they saying they aren’t attracted to me, or could it be that something else is going on? Is the unspoken message that they need me in other ways and they’re not getting those needs met? Do I need to work on how I’m showing up in other areas of the relationship? Maybe when they don’t feel connected, they pull away from sex. Or, maybe their avoidance of sex says, “I have so much anxiety about all of these other areas of life—parenting, finishing up an education, work, caring for elderly parents, financial hardship—all of which have nothing to do with a personal rejection of you.” Don’t get me wrong: the pain of rejection is very real. It can feel utterly tragic to be turned down for sex even once, not to mention chronically. But if you can talk about the problem in an attachment-friendly environment and look at it through the attachment lens—which provides for many less scary alternatives than your partner simply not wanting you—the conversations can create the kind of connection that can often contribute to sexual desire. Maybe your partner needs to be heard and validated for how overwhelmed they feel about life, instead of being told they’re a sexual letdown. There’s a decent chance that being heard and validated will be a turn-on. (While a simple loss of attraction can happen, I’ve found that this factor alone—isolated from other issues in the relationship—is very rarely the complete explanation.)

If you’re the nonpursuing partner, your sexual withdrawing might be driven by any of the above explanations or by self-beliefs like “I can’t enjoy sex if I’m the one who asks for it because I can’t be sure I’m really wanted.” Maybe you had past experiences around rejection that led you to vow that you’ll never ask for sex again. Other possibilities could be lingering resentments around sex or other parts of the relationship, or medical issues like hormone-related low libido. There are phases in life when responsibilities and challenges must take precedence, but sometimes there’s room to shore up self-care needs in order to be more available.

Sometimes one or both partners have difficulty embracing their sexual sides after becoming a parent, or they simply feel so depleted of energy that sex gets pushed to the back burner. In Mating in Captivity, author and sex therapist Esther Perel encourages parents to do their best to maintain their sexual connection, as well as their erotic selves (which have less to do with love and more to do with desire), not in spite of having kids, but for their kids. Children, after all, thrive in environments with happy, connected parents.

No matter the cause, if you’re the withdrawing partner you do have a responsibility to yourself, your partner, and your relationship to dig in and try to understand more about what’s holding you back. Whatever is going on, an explanation exists that makes sense and is valid. Your distancing didn’t materialize out of thin air. It could be a personal obstacle you’re struggling with, or it could be stemming from something going on in the relationship. Maybe it’s a medical issue you don’t want to face, maybe you’ve been doing therapy and you have some old trauma showing up that you’re not quite sure what to do with, maybe your self-care needs to be shored up so you can be more available, maybe you have some anger at your partner that needs to be hashed out.

Some partners lose the intensity of their sexual desire as the relationship progresses and they become more emotionally devoted. The same might be true when they have children. This is a way of compartmentalizing their sexual selves and their caretaking selves because somewhere along the line they developed the belief that the two can’t coexist.

Sometimes the very shame of being the “rejecting” partner can reinforce rejecting behaviors. Even if you haven’t completely lost desire, it might be easier for you to push sex away entirely in order to avoid your feelings around disappointing your partner. If this is the case, try opening up a conversation about it so that you can use the information to move away from shame and toward connection.





Sexual Trauma


Sometimes sexual problems, even ones that may seem like sexual stalemates or negative sex cycles, are actually trauma related. If you experience feelings of shame around sex (even when a part of you enjoys it), it could be related to sexual traumas from your past. Examples include not only obvious sexual abuse, but even subtle, chronic messages that are body shaming or leave you believing that sex is wrong or dirty. Keep in mind that trauma doesn’t have to be overtly sexual to damage your sexuality. Nonsexual physical abuse, for example, can have an enormous impact on the sexuality of sufferers.

Trauma is insidious. It can look different and show up in any number of ways. Signs that sexual trauma might be at play, regardless of the nature or degree of the trauma, include difficulty getting aroused or aroused consistently, difficulty achieving orgasm, erectile dysfunction, porn or sex addiction, feelings of repulsion toward your own or your partner’s sexual desire or sexuality, flashbacks to abusive episodes (sexual or otherwise), feelings of anxiety, sadness, or fear during sex, dissociation (a feeling of disconnecting from your body) during sex, or performance anxiety. Even when you don’t know it’s there, trauma can lead to excessive tension in your body, disrupting your ability to fully enjoy sex and even causing painful intercourse. Keep in mind that these experiences can be so subtle and seemingly so disconnected from your past that sometimes it’s tempting to blame bad feelings during sex on yourself or your partner (“I’m not relaxing enough,” “I need to be more open,” “They aren’t doing it how I asked,” “I can tell they’re just pretending to like it”), when really the enemy is trauma.

If you suspect you have physical or emotional sexual problems that might be related to trauma, or your past in any way, I recommend seeking help from a certified sex therapist, a psychotherapist trained to work with sexually related trauma and anxiety disorders, or even physical or occupational therapists trained to work with sex issues as they impact your pelvic floor and create pain and tension.

Communication about sex and your feelings is critical to overcoming whatever sexual problems might be plaguing your relationship. If you go into sex in a way that overrides your feelings, you run the risk of it becoming an even more negative experience. Instead of pushing through, sometimes it can be enormously helpful to stop and tell your partner what’s going on, even in the moment: “I’m starting to feel that sense of shame. Can you reassure me that this part of me is lovable and okay?” I know it might seem strange to have this conversation during sex, but when partners can provide each other with reassurance the moment that these painful feelings arise, it can turn an otherwise negative and disconnecting experience into a bonding one. Putting words to it is also reassuring for your partner. They might sense your distance and assume, without knowing any better, that your retreat is about something they’re doing wrong.





The “Healthy Sex Life”


Now that we’ve addressed what might be getting in the way of a good sex life, let’s talk about the other side of the coin: What does a healthy sex life between partners actually look like?

Some commonalities exist in the sex lives of couples who report having the highest overall relationship satisfaction. Of course, all couples have their own unique ways of defining a fulfilling sex life, so keep in mind that all research has exceptions. Couples with good sex lives aren’t afraid to open up to each other about their sexual wants, needs, and preferences. Securely attached couples don’t have a rigidly entrenched sexual pursue-withdraw dynamic, meaning both partners are relatively in touch with their inner experiences, which contributes to open, honest communication, including putting words to sexual shame and insecurities. Couples with good sex lives also have good sexual boundaries—they don’t do anything they aren’t comfortable with, but they also don’t judge each other for wanting to do whatever it is they’re uncomfortable with. A healthy response to differences might sound like “I’m not into that, but I don’t think less of you for being into it. We’re just different in this way. Luckily there are so many other things we both like.”

What about sexual “dry spells”? Even couples with great sex lives have dry spells and they view them as normal parts of life and life stages. Their overall sense of security helps them trust they’ll get back to it when the timing is right.

Of course, your relationship with yourself is paramount to your sexual relationship with your partner. To start, having a secure relationship with yourself helps with body acceptance, which helps you stay present during sex instead of being distracted by body dissatisfaction. You can learn and experiment with what you like sexually by knowing your own body. By learning to relate to your sexual self in a healthy way, you create an imprint of what will feel good from others. Having a secure relationship with yourself helps with things like relaxation and orgasm, and will help your partner feel better, too. So if you want a more secure sexual relationship with your partner, start with your sexual relationship with yourself. If you’re a female, the book Come As You Are by Emily Nagoski is a great resource for this.

Lastly, some very happy couples have sex rarely (such as those with medically limiting conditions or simply lower sexual desire), don’t have “in-person” sex (such as those who are long-distance), or don’t have sex at all (such as those who identify as being asexual). Some couples are polyamorous or have nontraditional arrangements such as open relationships, and that’s what works for them. All things considered, there is no statistic or definition of “healthy sex life” from me or anyone else that can override the unique “healthy” experience in your relationship.

This is a lot of information to absorb, and my hope is that by learning how to communicate outside of negative cycles, you and your significant other can begin to sort through it all in a way that helps you find each other sexually and strengthen your sexual bond more than ever. But just like all relationship growth, improving your sex life isn’t black or white: it’s not that you either have a good sex life or you don’t. Instead, it’s about the journey toward each other and toward deeper levels of connection.

If you’re having trouble finding the sexual closeness you want, don’t be afraid to seek professional help or outside resources to help you along. I highly recommend the podcast Foreplay Sex Radio, hosted by certified sex therapist Laurie Watson and EFT couples therapist George Faller, which provides invaluable information on a variety of sexual topics to help couples improve their sex lives from an attachment perspective. The good news about all the work you’re doing to foster your attachment-friendly environment, build security, and open up honest conversations about sex is that you can begin to understand what you want, and what your partner wants, in a way that is free of shame, and filled with vulnerability and honesty. Because ultimately no matter what the topic, the goal is the same: connection.





CHAPTER 12 When You Aren’t Seeing Results





Let’s say you’ve followed all the advice in this book—you’ve identified your attachment style, understood your triggers, self-regulated, worked on getting vulnerable, and tried to build an attachment-friendly environment—and still nothing. You and your partner are still fighting. You still feel misunderstood. There’s still a hostile energy in your home that you aren’t sure how to navigate. “Apparently we’re the exception,” you might be thinking. “These attachment principles and relationship advice sound great for others, but they don’t work for us.”

The first question to ask is, how do you define success? Maybe you think you won’t be successful until you and your partner live in an attachment-friendly environment where both of your attachment needs are met nearly all the time. When there’s a rupture, you can get back on track quickly. You feel emotionally and physically connected and approach life together as a team. This, of course, is the ideal. It’s what most insecurely attached couples want. And I hope it happens for you! Hopefully this book has helped you at least get on the right path. But no approach to relationship problems, no matter how logical or scientifically sound, can guarantee this outcome for everyone.

For those of you who aren’t quite there, let’s explore what might be happening. The first thing to consider is whether or not you have realistic expectations of success. Do you view success as “perfect… the exact relationship you’ve always wanted”? If so, it might be time to scale back and view the work in this book as a launching point. A better question to measure your success is “Have we grown enough to show there’s hope?” What I’ve found is that couples who are growing together can keep growing together. But this doesn’t mean growth is linear; it never is. Growth is a two-steps-forward, one-step-back process. The steps back are frustrating and demoralizing, I know, but they’re necessary because they provide the most learning opportunities for more growth. In other words, without the steps back there are no steps forward. This is true for all couples, no matter how strong they are.

Speaking of growth, not all partners grow at the same rate. If you’re reading this book, and your partner isn’t, you’re learning new ways to be in a relationship and you have the opportunity to start showing up in new ways, even if your partner isn’t initially joining you. In an emotional system such as a relationship or family, the emotional energy of even one person affects the entire system. Your positive changes will rub off. When you, and only you, stop engaging in negative cycles, they can’t happen. When you stop showing up with avoidance, you no longer reinforce your partner’s anxious attachment, and vice versa. This will create a safer, more attachment-friendly environment. When an attachment-friendly environment is established—and this takes time—change is inevitable. The change might feel bad at first because change, even positive change, can be uncomfortable initially. It’s almost always the case that attachment-friendly environments ultimately end up bringing the best out of everyone in the system, although everybody has different versions of “their best,” which can depend on a number of factors. I don’t want any two people to be in a relationship where one is “doing all the work”—a relationship can’t thrive in that case—but I also don’t want to see anyone prematurely give up because one partner isn’t initially on board.

When working with couples, time and again I’ve seen that when we have hard sessions that don’t always end in closeness, they come to the next session reporting that it ended up being a great week for them. Yes, the sessions unearthed hard stuff that they maybe didn’t know what to do with in the moment, but as each partner had some space to process, they settled into profound growth. What I’m saying is, be careful not to miss the forest for the trees.

But in the worst-case scenario… let’s say you’ve put in the work to your best ability. You have work to do, but in the grand scheme you’ve become more validating, have increased empathy, deliver your messages in a healthier way, respond to your partner in a healthier way, don’t get caught up in negative cycles, and can set attachment-friendly boundaries as necessary. You’ve been growing as an individual. You’re getting better at facing your feelings, self-regulating, and self-care. Again, you’re not perfect, but your growth is real. Yet, when it comes to your relationship satisfaction… it’s still low. You’re still not feeling close, responded to, or a felt sense of met attachment needs. In this case, and it’s a terrible one, it’s important to let yourself feel the disappointment, and even anger, anyone would feel. At the same time, while the overriding goal of Secure Love is to help you find a securely attached relationship with your partner, the benefit of finding a securely attached relationship with yourself cannot be understated. The one relationship in your life that will last forever, from birth to death, which will be with you twenty-four hours a day, the relationship you have first and foremost, no matter how much you need connection with others, is your relationship with you. And every time you validate your partner, self-regulate before acting out, shore up your empathy, get vulnerable, set healthy boundaries, communicate from self instead of from blame and shame, advocate for your attachment needs, and on and on, you are showing up for yourself, loving yourself, building self-trust, building self-confidence, and building self-care… all of which are the major components of self-security. You are not only trying to gain a better relationship with your partner, you’re learning how to be in a healthy relationship at all. No matter what your partner is doing, you are building a better life for yourself, even when it might not be evident right away. Your growth is an investment in your future self and other relationships outside of your romantic partnership, including your children, which will pay off in dividends. And we all know that, unfortunately, life happens and circumstances change beyond our control. If you ever are in a new relationship, your level of growth is not only going to inform what you look for in a partner, but it will heavily inform how healthy the relationship will be from the start. So while this book is focused on relationship growth, it’s just as much about self-growth.





Consulting the Professionals


If you feel like you’ve done everything you can and nothing in your relationship is changing, that in itself is information. If that’s the case, I might say that this approach did “work,” because you have clarity today—about yourself and your partner and your relationship—that you might not have had before. From that clarity comes options. You have choices to make, presented in this chapter, most of which will require self-exploration that you can do on your own. But before we dig into those, I want to address your first option: getting professional help.

Some of you have your own unique extenuating circumstances and will need a higher level of help than this book alone can provide. Some circumstances are simply harder to navigate than others, especially when there aren’t easy answers for what resolution even looks like. These circumstances could include having a blended family, dealing with a military deployment, having a partner with a personality disorder, managing neurodivergence, surviving a natural disaster, having a sick child, managing chronic illness, and so much more. When this is the case, I recommend getting professional help from a couples therapist who works from an attachment perspective and who directly works toward stabilizing a couple’s negative cycle. If possible, try to find one who specializes in working with your particular challenge. (The truth is, any couple can benefit from couples counseling, but for couples who fall into the aforementioned categories, it’s especially key.) Emotionally Focused Therapy for Couples is especially effective. Formal studies on the effectiveness of EFT reflect the same progress I see with couples in my practice: at least 70 percent of couples are symptom free at the end of treatment (and continue to be at a two-year follow-up) and an even higher percentage have seen marked improvement. Fortunately there are therapists who practice EFT worldwide (visit ICEEFT.com for an EFT therapist in your area). I recommend EFT because that’s how I’ve been extensively trained and so I know for certain that this type of work will most closely align with the philosophy of the material in this book.





What Now?


So, what if you’ve done your absolute best to put the ideas of this book into practice, you’ve given time, but your partner doesn’t seem to be moving with you, you’re not happy in the relationship, and you have very little hope things will ever change? You feel stuck, frustrated, and alone. Now what?

You have three viable options: 1) maintain the status quo, 2) keep working on you and your side of the relationship, or 3) part ways.

But before we get into those options, let’s look at what is not viable that many of you are doing but that is keeping you stuck: working on the relationship in a negative cycle.





When “Working on the Relationship” Becomes Its Own Negative Cycle


What’s missing from our three options above is the very thing you might be most tempted to do: trying to force change.

Trying to force, coerce, or pressure your partner to change (or vice versa) can become part of its own negative cycle. Some signs this is happening include if you or your partner find your primary motivation for changing is to “get the other partner to change” instead of growing as individuals or making long-term investments in the relationship; being hypervigilant to anything the other partner says or does (or doesn’t say or do) to determine whether or not they’re changing; feeling driven by fear and anxiety instead of driven toward deeper connection; and/or are being excessively threatening or demanding.

Let’s say you and your partner are both having minor health issues that will likely respond well to a healthier diet. Your partner has an interest in nutrition and has decided the two of you need to adopt a healthier diet. You’re not entirely opposed to the idea—you recognize the need—but do you really want to dramatically change the way you eat? Your partner, on the other hand, is very enthusiastic. In fact, what starts as enthusiasm quickly escalates into pressure: “Did you have your green smoothie today?” they might text you after lunch. “Have you read that article I sent you?” they ask later in the evening. “Oh no,” you think, “not another conversation about food.”

Your partner senses your distance from the topic, which causes them to exert even more pressure: “How could you not want to be healthy? These changes aren’t just to help me, they’re to help us. This is about our future together. What if we end up with diabetes? It runs in both of our families. This is serious. How could you not want to do whatever we can?”

You want to be supportive, so you try to be a team player. You listen to health podcasts with your partner, when you just want to watch Netflix. You swap out sugary snacks with veggies and nuts. You start packing salads for lunch. But the second your coworkers invite you to the highly raved-about specialty cupcake shop that just opened up in your building, you’re first in line.

You don’t mention the treat to your partner because you don’t want to deal with the long conversation about how you’re not putting in the work like they are. But they end up seeing a picture of you on your coworker’s social media account: “Cupcakes with the BEST coworkers ever!”

Eventually you stop going along with the plan. You’re no longer interested in keeping the peace. What’s the point anyway? Your partner mostly just emphasizes your failures to “stick to the program.” So you start pushing back. “This is ridiculous,” you protest. “Eating doesn’t have to be so complicated!” You try to argue details about the legitimacy of different ways of eating, but your partner only doubles down and tells you that you must not even care. Finally, you shut down and refuse to talk about food.

What just happened? Food now has its own private negative cycle in your relationship.

This exact scenario can happen with couples when it comes to relationship work, and it’s a very common explanation when relationship change doesn’t seem to be working. Maybe Gianna wants her partner Luca to stop blaming her for not being emotionally available, but the way she communicates her feelings of rejection is by telling Luca, “You’re constantly criticizing me; it gets old. If you ever want us to grow as a couple, you need to stop doing that.” Or maybe Tanny wants her partner Gavin to be less defensive. When she brings up concerns, and Gavin starts telling her why she’s “seeing it all wrong,” Tanny responds with “See… we’ll never get out of our negative cycle because you just don’t want to change.” Gavin and Tanny are both meeting fire with fire, and when that happens, relationship change takes on its own negative cycle. One partner (usually the anxious partner, who is more likely to bring up problems) recognizes there’s a problem, a very legitimate problem, that needs to be addressed. They take the lead, do the research, roll up their sleeves, and get a plan in place. The effort is truly commendable, but the way they approach the problem and try to implement the plan can easily turn into a situation where the solution becomes part of the problem.

The second partner (usually the avoidant, who is more likely to try to maintain the status quo to avoid shame and conflict) reacts to the pressure by distancing. After all, the current plan isn’t working so it’s best to just avoid the topic. In reaction, the first partner keeps pressing. The more partner one pushes the topic of relationship help with pressure, the more partner two distances; partner one feels alone, partner two feels like partner one’s demands only make things worse. Nobody’s needs are met; nobody is happy.

If you are the person reading this book, trying to make change, you might be wondering why partner two can’t just “go along with it.” But sometimes it doesn’t work that way. And sometimes partner two’s resistance is warranted—they aren’t resisting relationship change as much as they’re resisting how bad all of this is making them feel. My goal is to make the space for change, without it having to feel bad. The way to do this is to work to change the environment, not change your partner.

Here’s what healthy environment change might look like in our diet example: Partner one talks to partner two about making dietary changes. Maybe partner two agrees there’s a problem, maybe not. At any rate, partner one says, “I’m going to be keeping healthier foods in the house and I am going to try to eat healthier and cook at home more.” Then partner one starts to make changes. They stock the fridge with healthy snacks. When they are cooking for the family, they don’t go to extremes but instead integrate the new style with the old style. Most important, they model healthy changes, inviting the other partner to come along but without the pressure of “you must do what I do or else,” or “if you really love me you’ll do it this way,” or “when you fail to do it right, we’re going to have lengthy conversations about what you need to be doing better.” They also don’t say, “If you don’t get healthier with me, I won’t get healthy either.”

Of course partner one wants partner two to join them in being healthier. But taking any of these pressuring or controlling approaches is, for most couples, the fastest way to ensure it doesn’t happen. In fact, this is true for people in general. Most people will rebel when they feel controlled—it’s an understandable human need to maintain a sense of dignity.

This is what it takes to create an attachment-friendly environment. You can’t force your partner to change, but you can decide that you are going to do your best to help make a new way of communicating easier for both of you. You can interrupt the cycle. You can empathize. You can model healthy changes. You can do all this without saying, “You need to change, too… or else.”

When one partner is pushing hard for change and the other is distancing from the topic, it’s a reflection of the very imbalance already plaguing the relationship: the anxious partner’s understandable quest to close the distance (or avoid loneliness) by hyperfocusing on immediate change, and the avoidant partner’s understandable quest to keep the peace (or avoid shame) by avoiding tough topics. Remember that secure attachment comes from relationship balance, and in moments of growth the balance comes from each partner acknowledging the need for change and taking responsibility for their own part (even if it takes time to get there). If you’re the partner initiating relationship change, you have to be willing to stay the course and get out of your own extremes (for anxious partners, that’s usually pressure and control) long enough for your partner to begin making the same shifts as a response to the new environment. If you’re the avoidant partner, you need to take the risk of opening yourself up to new information.

If pressure and controlling for outcome aren’t going to get your partner to open up to change, what might? In addition to creating an attachment-friendly environment, I like to start by trying to meet our own needs, and then following up with modeling, like in our food example. Think about what you want from the relationship, see if you can give it to yourself, and then model it for your partner. Do you want your partner to be more validating? Instead of demanding validation from them, validate yourself first by saying to yourself, “My feelings are real and they make sense.” It will never be enough from your partner if you aren’t able to first self-validate. If you can’t, you’re going to try to pull more from them than any other human, even the most loving partner, can realistically give. Next, show them what validation looks and feels like by validating them… even when it means validating their resistance to relationship work.

What do I mean? Well, if your partner is resistant to relationship work, they might have a very good reason for feeling that way. Here are some common reasons some of my clients resist getting relationship help: they see it as a sign of weakness or incompetence; they see it as the final option for a relationship, only useful if it’s going to prevent a breakup; they have doubts it will be effective; they see it as a surefire way to get accused of being wrong, not just by their partner but now by a therapist; they see it as a way to be controlled. Some partners might see relationship work as an opportunity for them to be bulldozed as if their ideas aren’t relevant. They see it as a threat to the status quo, which might not be ideal but is at least safe in its familiarity. They see “working on it” as a threat to their authenticity or to the ability to just enjoy each other instead of working all the time. They are too tired to think. They can’t come up with the “right” things to say and will feel like a failure. Maybe they’ve seen friends and family get couples therapy only to divorce soon after. They’re worried about finances, and it can sometimes be cost-prohibitive (one of the reasons I’m writing this book). Again, I’m not justifying the reasons, I’m seeking to understand them through the lens of attachment.

Consider this example of the dynamic with Victor and Dahlia: Victor recognizes himself as an anxious partner and his partner Dahlia as an avoidant partner. He recognizes their negative cycles and is committed to working toward secure attachment. When he brings the idea of seeing a couples therapist to Dahlia, she responds by telling him they don’t need couples therapy, that they’re doing better than most other couples she knows, and that couples therapy is for couples on the verge of divorce, not for couples like them who have normal problems. Victor is shattered. He doesn’t think they’re on the verge of divorce, but he knows there’s something better—that they could fight less and feel more connected.

But Victor also knows that while he can’t control whether Dahlia will go to couples therapy, he can control how he shows up in the relationship. His urge is to tell Dahlia how wrong she is about couples therapy and to convince her that prevention is the best medicine, but he resists.

In their negative cycle, Dahlia does a lot of responding to Victor’s emotions with “Why are you so upset? It’s not that big a deal,” and “Do we have to talk about this right now? Can’t we just enjoy the day?” Victor, as the anxious partner, is in touch with his need for more emotional validation in the relationship.

Victor also recognizes that Dahlia, as an avoidant partner, is not as in touch with her emotional needs, but that doesn’t mean her own need for emotional validation doesn’t exist. Piecing this together, Victor starts responding to Dahlia’s resistance to couples therapy with curiosity and validation, as if sending her the message “I see you. You make sense. Your fears are understandable.” He might directly communicate this by saying, “Okay, I’m hearing you. Tell me more about your concerns,” or “I can see why you wouldn’t want to identify us as a ‘broken couple,’ that makes sense to me,” or “I like the idea of couples therapy because I’d like to improve our communication, but at the same time I can respect your feelings about it, too,” or even “Maybe to you couples therapy represents failure and the last thing you need is to feel like we’re failing.” After letting Dahlia know she’s safe to have her own ideas and feelings held as worthy, Victor might decide to share more directly about his needs: “I get where you’re coming from. I wouldn’t want to go forward with something I wasn’t sure about, either. I just ask you to at least keep an open mind because it might be something that can really benefit us.”

What happens next? Ideally when changes like this are put into place over the course of time, Dahlia will get the emotional support she’s likely never had before and will naturally begin to give it back, without coercion, and without inserting more of what’s not working into the relationship.

When you are tempted to pressure or control your partner in order to enact change, consider this instead: be the change you want to see. If you want understanding, understand. If you want curiosity, be curious. If you want change, change. If you want to be heard, listen. If you want your partner to change, notice the times when they do. In other words, reflect what you want to grow.

Finally, your relationship with yourself is fundamental. How you treat yourself will show up in how you treat your partner. You aren’t putting on the heat and approaching your partner from a place of control because you’re maniacal or unempathic. You have very good reason for taking this approach, whatever that reason might be. The chances are high that you grew up being motivated in the same way, and it only makes sense that that’s how you might approach your partner. Also, the pain of a strained relationship is real—it hurts, it’s lonely, frustrating, and maddening. The temptation to feel better in the best way you know how is so compelling. Give yourself this validation and understanding. But don’t forget to balance it out with the idea that just because everything you do makes sense on some level, and your feelings are valid, that doesn’t mean what you’re doing is going to help you get what you need.





Moving Forward: Three Viable Options


Option One: Maintain the Status Quo


In my opinion, maintaining the status quo is the least desirable of the three options, but let’s explore what it means. Maintaining the status quo essentially means giving up on any more self-work and deciding, “Well, I guess this is as good as it’s going to get.” Someone who takes this route might think that change can only happen when both parties commit, and decide to accept the relationship the way it is. This might be the easiest option—after all, it requires the least amount of effort, and sometimes it feels safer to not try at all than to try and be disappointed. Maintaining the status quo often results in partners keeping each other down because they decide that “if you’re not going to change, I’m not going to change”—nobody changes. The partners hum along in mediocrity at best, misery at worst.

For some people the status quo might seem incredibly safe because your relationship environment might not be great, but it is familiar. Sometimes the devil you know really does seem better than the devil you don’t. If you decide to go this route, nobody has to leave their comfort zone. Doing the work by yourself probably seems daunting, and possibly like a setup for feeling disappointed, and leaving the relationship might seem downright terrifying. At the same time, doing nothing comes with its own risk: staying stuck.

Everybody has their own reasons for maintaining the status quo in their relationship. Relationship work is work: it takes time and a lot of emotional energy, especially if you feel you’re the one doing the bulk of it. Maybe you just don’t have the energy right now to work too hard. Trying to raise kids and keep food on the table is just about all you can handle. My hope is that at the very least you choose to maintain the status quo with intention: “Our status quo might not be ideal, but it is what it is for now.” That level of consciousness is growth in itself.





Option Two: Keep Working on You and Your Side of the Relationship


If you and your partner aren’t equally invested in working on the relationship, change will undoubtedly be more difficult, but it’s not at all hopeless. If you choose to work on your own side of the street, the worst that can happen is still a huge success: you grow as an individual.

As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, time and again, I’ve observed that when one partner starts to make changes and an attachment-friendly environment is set into motion, all kinds of space gets opened up for change. But change is about so much more than what your partner is up to; for change to be real, it has to be foremost about you. You can keep exploring the attachment patterns you picked up in childhood so you can use the insight to better understand yourself in the service of making better choices for your own peace of mind.

Moving away from the status quo will be uncomfortable. Even in the best of circumstances, when both partners are fully on board from the start, your brain circuitry has a system in place that does not want to rewire. It will do everything in its power to resist change and will interpret, faster than you know what’s happening, something as a threat. In the beginning, every consideration of a new move will feel weird. If your partner tells you something you don’t want to hear, even just considering saying something like “Tell me more, I’m not sure I understand what you mean” instead of “What are you talking about? I never do that!” will make your neural pathways scream, “What are you doing? Are you crazy! Don’t ask for more criticism, that’s not safe!”

But the benefits of pushing through your discomfort and taking risks even when your nervous system is giving you a hard no will pay off in dividends for you as an individual. For one, choosing to take new action to avoid negative cycles will defuse conflict in a way that will lower your overall stress because heated negative cycles are stressful and exhausting. When you can look back on your day, week, month, year, and say, “Wow, I’m doing things differently! I’m not getting sucked into rabbit holes and it’s all because of me,” your confidence will only grow. And with confidence you’ll learn to trust yourself. You’ll learn to trust that you can rely on yourself to show up in a way that is healthy and self-compassionate instead of that old drive to fight or avoid. Self-trust is self-esteem is self-security is your secure attachment with yourself.

It’s my experience and belief that somewhere deep inside all of us is a drive to grow. We all truly want to be our best selves and manifest our inherent goodness, although sometimes, for some people, they either don’t know where to start, or they feel hopeless, or they have so much shame they can’t bear to face. This is where partners can have an enormous impact on each other. If you’re the healthier partner right now, I encourage you to create that de-shaming, attachment-friendly environment as much as you can on your own. Do it for you, for your family, and for the fact that it just might be enough to kick-start your partner’s drive for growth.

If you choose this option, and you’ve taken this advice and you’ve given it time, and your partner still isn’t changing? Maybe you decide to stay, or at least stay for now. Some people choose to stay in less-than-fulfilling relationships for many different logistical reasons (not wanting to split up a family or finances, maybe), continue to do their part to create a healthy environment, learn to appreciate the relationship for what it is, both strengths and shortcomings, and find other ways to get their emotional needs met. In this case, your acceptance of “what is” might take some grieving. You might have to let go of the idea of what you wanted your relationship to look like, and that’s a loss.

But staying in a relationship that isn’t exactly what you hoped and planned for doesn’t mean all is lost. Even when things aren’t perfect, better is a really good step. If you do all this work and the relationship still isn’t ideal, but you’ve seen improvement, then your hard work isn’t in vain. You might have to step back to see it. Our brains are wired to be biased toward what isn’t working so sometimes we need to be intentional about getting some perspective to be able to make an accurate assessment. Ask yourself, “If things have truly improved, how might that be?” See what you come up with. I’m not asking you to view things through rose-colored glasses, but to give it time for improvement to be seen. Just as it can be difficult to recognize the physical growth of the children you may have in your life on a day-to-day basis until it hits you one day that your teenage son has imperceptibly lost two inches on his pant cuffs, it can also be hard to see positive relationship growth on a day-to-day basis. Rarely do I have clients come in saying, “We’re cured!” Rather, after weeks or months of therapy they come to their sessions casually saying, “Yeah… we had a great week,” as if that’s just the new norm. What I’m saying is that you might have to intentionally focus on areas of growth to recognize in the short term when the bad times might still be more pronounced than the good ones. Intentionally assessing for improvement can give you the momentum you need to continue this important journey.

Finally, while the focus of this book is on romantic relationships, relationship work doesn’t end there. All relationships, including the ones you’re in outside of your partnership, and also any future relationships you may find yourself in, benefit from the principles in this book: validation, empathy, active listening, self-regulation. All these foster connection, and connection feels good.





Option Three: Part Ways


As hard as it can be to face, sometimes after a significant period of time (the length of which is different for everyone), you make great strides with your personal growth and start showing up in the relationship in the healthiest way possible, but you’re still miserable. Maybe your partner is not changing, or maybe getting your negative cycle in better shape has clarified for you that some of the problems in your relationship really are about incompatibility rather than communication. The reality is that sometimes two people aren’t a good fit. Sometimes two people used to be a good fit but have grown apart. Healthy communication can go a long way in creating compatibility, but it can’t guarantee compatibility.

If that’s what you’re finding to be true and you have little hope of getting the relationship you’re hoping for, then what? At this point, you might need to decide that the healthiest path forward is to end things and move on. That is not just okay; it might just be the best option for yourself and all involved. I’ve worked with couples who’ve done great work to manage negative cycles—couples therapy gold medalists!—but ultimately, it made sense for them to end the relationship. Some have wanted different things out of life; some have determined that they are better friends than lovers; some have had other reasons. As paradoxical as it might sound, my job as a couples therapist is not to save a relationship; my job is to make it healthy for the partners to go forward together, or apart, from a place of clarity that can only be found in safe communication.

When your relationship isn’t improving after you’ve put in hard work and started changing, it’s a tender spot to be in. Give yourself some love and compassion, and know you don’t have to figure anything out immediately. Commit to yourself and this process of healing.





CHAPTER 13 Instead of This, Do This





From my work in my private practice and on social media, I’ve learned that people want words. It’s one thing for me to tell you what to do conceptually, but giving you the words is what will make this work come alive for you. This is exactly what I do with the couples I treat. I help them find their real, authentic inner experience and then I give them the words to share it. The experience is theirs, and eventually the words become theirs, too, but at first they need more guidance to learn the new language of attachment.

This chapter is full of phrases you can use with your partner in tough situations. They are very generically written because, as you can imagine, it’s not possible to reflect the vocabulary and style of speaking for each of you. So, while they might not feel authentic to you, see if you can try them anyway. Play around with them. Get vulnerable. Take the principles of attachment-friendly communication we’ve covered and make them your own. And remember, this work is about authenticity, so if you feel awkward, say it: “I might sound silly, but the old way isn’t working so let’s try something new anyway.” Also keep in mind, so many factors go into the way partners speak to each other: cultural factors, gender factors, generational or regional factors, and on and on. Some couples are more comfortable being edgy with each other in a way that would make other couples gasp. Some couples speak to each other so formally that if you were watching them, you might wonder if they were in a romantic relationship at all. I don’t even use many of these phrases with my husband, and I’m the one writing this book! (I do, however, use the principles.) My point is, take the principles I have to offer, make them your own, take what works, and leave the rest.

Hopefully you and your partner have already worked through this book, in which case most of these phrases should land well. If not, my guess is that they’ll at least land better than whatever else you’ve been doing that has launched you into the negative cycle. If you keep practicing speaking from a place of “self” and through an attachment lens, over time the words will start to take on a more authentic flavor and will become more of your own.

Before approaching a tough topic, self-regulate to calm and prepare your nervous system. Use your breathing skills, mindfulness and mentalization skills, or any other self-regulation techniques you find useful (revisit chapter 5 for more ideas) to find clarity, feel grounded, and have more ability to say to yourself, “I’ve got this, everything is okay. I’m safe. I’m strong. I can be vulnerable. I’m learning new ways to be in my relationship, and that feels really good.”

Then, when you talk to your partner, don’t underestimate the emotionally regulating and connecting power of nonverbal communication and touch. As you say these phrases, try to make eye contact, turn your body toward your partner, open up your stance, use physical touch, hold their hand, or do anything else that can help you physically connect to them, co-regulate, and send the message “You’re important to me.” Sometimes even moving to the same side of the table helps show you’re on the same side. Find what works for you both.

This work is not about “walking on eggshells” in order to keep your partner from reacting poorly, but rather about doing your best to create emotional safety and to help each of you feel more confident about your communication skills. The following phrases come from a place of self, vulnerability, transparency, curiosity, and/or are embedded with attachment meaning. They are free of blame, shame, criticism, defensiveness, or any other potential triggers.

Lastly, the spirit of this work is planting seeds and creating shifts, not getting exactly what you’re hoping for in a moment. It’s about progress over perfection. If you start speaking in a new way, you might not get the response you want, and you might even get pushback. Change, even good change, can feel threatening when it’s new. If you get pushback, stay the course and be honest: “Here’s what I’m trying to do and here’s why—I’m trying to show up differently in this relationship because of how important it is to me, and because I want to be proud of who I am.”

Also, I’ve given examples of specific topics, but most of the examples can be used in different contexts unique to your relationship.





When You’re Feeling Lonely or You Want to Spend More Time with Your Partner


Instead of:

“You never want to spend time with me.”

Try:

“I appreciate how hard you work and I also really miss you. I think both of us will feel better if we carve out some time to connect. What are your thoughts?”

Protest elicits defensiveness. “Never” and “always” create arguments because it’s usually easy to find exceptions, in which case the real issue—I miss you—gets sidetracked. The alternative version is attachment-friendly in that it includes met attachment needs (“I appreciate you”), which create safety. It speaks to the bigger meaning, “I miss you,” rather than creating arguments over facts. It speaks from a place of self (“here’s what’s happening for me”), which will prevent the need for defensiveness. Inviting your partner to share their thoughts sends them the message that they matter to you, which is another met attachment need.





When You’re Feeling Overwhelmed with Life and Need Help


Instead of:

“I do everything around here.”

Try:

“It’s important for me to feel like we’re a team; that’s one of the ways I feel close to you. Here’s what’s going on with me and what would feel better…”

Or:

“Let’s talk about our different standards around the house so we can work together where we see eye to eye, and try to meet each other where we don’t.”

Or:

“When it comes to our chores around the house, I know I’ve given you the message in the past that your way of doing things isn’t the right way, and that maybe that’s felt bad for you. If so, I’d like to try reaching each other in a better way.”

The original statement invites arguments over facts; it’s a me-versus-you approach, and is delivered as a global protest. Also, it shows that you may have lost sight of what your partner does contribute, and their experience, which can get lost when we’re triggered. The alternative statements I’ve suggested own past behaviors that may have impacted you and your partner, and that creates safety and trust. Placing a focus on “team” and “closeness” maintains the attachment lens, instead of the “you-versus-me” lens, while being clear about what will help you feel safe and open to more focused solutions.





When You’re Annoyed About Something That’s Important Enough to Bring Up


Instead of:

“I’m tired of being late everywhere we go because you can’t be ready on time.”

Or:

“It drives me crazy when you bring up my work problems in front of other people. Why do you have to do that?”

Try:

“I value our time together more than anything, but it makes me anxious to be late. I feel sick inside in those moments. I need to talk about it and know it matters to you.”

Or:

“I know you’re trying to engage and I love that about you, but when you bring up my work problems in front of other people, I get embarrassed. Can you be more mindful of that?”

The first options are protests, shaming, and take a me-versus-you approach. It’s easy for someone to tune out protests, or experience them as a threat, because they don’t reveal vulnerability. But owning your needs instead of judging your partner’s behavior is nonshaming and attachment-friendly. The latter options are solution-focused and validating to your partner’s experience, which creates safety and is good modeling. When you share with your partner more about how their actions emotionally impact you, it’s more likely to inspire empathy. Empathy is a better motivator than shame and protest.

But I want to point out, not everything needs to be brought up. Sometimes feeling annoyed is less about what your partner is doing and more about your mood or unhealed wounds haunting you from your past. You might decide to simply take a walk, “shake it out,” jot down a gratitude list, journal, or trust that this one moment doesn’t define the entire relationship and that “this too shall pass” because, truthfully, that’s just how relationships work. You choose your battles.





When You Need to Know There’s Space for Your Way, Too


Instead of:

“Why does everything have to be your way?”

Or:

“Stop telling me what to do.”

Try:

“I like to be tidy but I’m never going to have the same standards as you. How can we meet in the middle?”

Or:

“I get it. I know you feel most comfortable when things go the way you want them to. But as an adult, I need to be able to do things my way, even when sometimes it’s different from your way.”

The original statements are critical protests, which risk shutting down the other, or inspiring them to get defensive or counterblame you, all of which will start a negative cycle. The alternatives, however, set gentle boundaries around what you can do, without creating shame or judging your partner’s way or feelings about it. They offer the opportunity to talk about solutions instead of getting stuck in accusations. They are validating and speak through an attachment lens by seeking to protect closeness in the relationship. They say, “I care about you. I care about us. You’re not the enemy.”





You Want to Bring Up a Difficult Topic


Instead of:

“We need to talk about…” (in a demanding tone)

Try:

“I have something I need to talk about and it’s going to be hard for both of us because we haven’t had a lot of luck with this topic in the past. Our relationship is too important to me to get stuck in a negative cycle. Do you have any ideas on how we can prevent that from happening?”

Or:

“I’m so proud of all the work we’ve done to communicate better with each other, and it keeps getting better. Can I bring something up that might be hard and see how we do?”

Or:

“I’d like to sit down and talk about our budget because financial safety is extremely important to me. At the same time, it’s also really important to me that we talk when it’s a good time for you. Can we make a plan?”

Or:

Use the DEAR MAN technique, created by Marsha Linehan. You can find more information about the DEAR MAN approach online.

D escribe the problem

E xpress how it affects you

A ssert what you need

R einforce the message

M be Mindful of staying on topic

A ccess confidence

N egotiate



For example:

We have too much credit card debt (D). That’s a problem for me. It causes me anxiety. I can’t feel close to you if we can’t talk about it, and I don’t want that to happen (E). I need a commitment from you that we can take some time to talk about it soon (A). It’s a problem I can’t live with and I need for us to try to meet each other on this (R).

If your partner changes the subject with “why do you always bring this up when we’re having dinner/going to bed/on our way to work/having a nice walk/etc.”:

“It might not be the best time to mention it, but I need a plan.” (M) As you speak, don’t second-guess yourself. Remember that it’s good for you and the relationship for you to advocate for your needs (A). “Here’s when I’d like to talk. When is it a good time for you?” (N)

Demands send the message that your partner is “less-than” instead of your equal. Chances are they won’t be inspired to collaborate if they don’t feel like an equal. The alternative approaches use a teamwork mentality. Leading with the positive is motivating—it provides reward for effort. Acknowledging it will be hard makes it easier to manage, and making a plan allows each partner the opportunity to feel a sense of control over when the conversation will happen, instead of feeling blindsided, and will give each partner space to reflect on their thoughts and feelings so they are more likely to respond instead of react.

The DEAR MAN approach is effective because it helps you stay organized as you speak, prevents the topic from going off course, and encourages solutions.





You Don’t Agree with Your Partner


Instead of:

“You’re wrong.”

Try:

“Tell me more about how you came to see it this way.”

Or:

“Being able to disagree while still respecting each other is really important to me. Would you be willing to work together to get us to that place?”

Or:

“Your feelings about this make a lot of sense to me. I feel afraid of bad things happening, too. I have a different idea about how to approach this, but that doesn’t mean I can’t see and hear you.”

Nobody reacts well to being told they’re wrong. It’s invalidating, when we all need to be respected as worthy humans with a right to our thoughts and opinions. In contrast, curiosity sends the message that your partner’s opinion matters, and that you view them as worthy and respect their separateness. Being open means you might learn something new and grow as a person. It also makes it more likely that you’ll be heard and your partner might learn something new, because feeling safe gives people room to step back and reflect instead of clinging to ideas out of fear. This makes for rich, stimulating, intellectual connection, and that kind of connection is bonding. These approaches open up intentional dialogue about how to approach disagreement, instead of blindly going into negative cycles.





When You’re Feeling Defensive Because Your Partner Is (or You Perceive They Are) Overly Critical


Instead of:

“That’s not true, I’m doing my best and you refuse to appreciate anything about me…”

Or:

“You’re the one that yells. I only yell because you yell.”

Try:

“I want to start defending myself right now, but I don’t want to do that to our relationship. I’m committed to staying present and hearing you out.”

Or:

“What you have to say is important to me, and you have good reason to be afraid you won’t be heard because of all the negative cycles we’ve been stuck in. I want to hear you but when it comes at me like that it just hurts. Can we try this in a different way?”

Or:

“When you say I’m inconsiderate, what are you really needing for me to know/what feelings are you really trying to tell me about/what are you really needing right now?”

The first options are invalidating negative cycle behaviors that escalate instead of defuse. The original topic will get lost, and nobody will be heard. They don’t address the criticism, or perceived criticism. When you name your urge, put words to it, you can relieve some of the pressure to act on it. Telling your partner that you’re willing to do something new sends the message that you care about them and your relationship so much that you’re willing to be vulnerable and step out of your comfort zone. That meets an attachment need. Sharing vulnerability inspires empathy, which makes it more likely they’ll be willing to deliver their concern in a more attachment-friendly way, and being curious gives them the opportunity to clarify so they don’t feel misunderstood.





When You Feel the Urge to Disengage or Shut Down


Instead of:

Shutting down

Try:

“I’m afraid if I don’t shut this down, it’s going to become a big fight, but I also know if I do that it will leave you feeling abandoned. What can we do differently right now?”

Or:

“Everything in me just wants to fix this, but since I don’t know how, I can feel myself getting overwhelmed and tuning out. I want to let you in on what’s going on inside of me, so we can try something new.”

Or:

“I know we haven’t been able to do this well in the past and you worry you aren’t going to be heard. Your concerns matter to me and I want to try to meet you. At the same time, I feel unseen when it comes at me like this. Can we start this over?”

Shutting down leaves your partner feeling abandoned, unheard, alone, and frustrated. It won’t solve problems and even if the topic gets dropped in the moment, it will continue to come up until there’s enough attachment safety (both partners feel valued, seen, respected, etc.) to address it. These verbal responses show vulnerability, which is the very emotional engagement that helps your partner not feel alone. They send the message that you aren’t protecting yourself from your partner by shutting down; you’re protecting yourself from shame and relationship threat. At the same time, they say that the relationship matters so much to you that you’re willing to face your fears and step out of your comfort zone.





When You Feel Emotionally Shut Out


Instead of:

“What’s going on? Why won’t you talk to me about how you’re feeling?”

Try:

“I understand it’s hard for you to talk about your feelings. I’m not here to judge you for that and I know you’re not trying to hurt me. At the same time, when I can’t reach you it’s lonely for me. I want to know you.”

Or:

“I’m understanding more about how overwhelmed you get when you don’t know what to do. Conflict can be different from what we both experienced in our childhoods. I want to try a new way to do this that will help us reach each other.”

Or:

“I learned that my feelings show up in my body in tension or heaviness. Do you ever notice that? If so, maybe you can share that with me. I need to be able to connect with you to feel close. Otherwise I feel out here on my own.”

People who are out of touch with their feelings will feel overwhelmed by a simple “why won’t you talk to me?” because they don’t know how to answer. The alternative examples are meant to validate your partner’s struggle, use curiosity to open a deeper conversation, and use an attachment lens: “I want to know about your feelings in order to be close” as opposed to “You’re letting me down by not sharing your feelings.” They are meant to create room for deeper conversations, in the moment or in the future. Go slow… people who shut down do so to stay safe from feelings of shame. Too much too soon can be overwhelming. It’s also important for your partner to know what you need and how you’re impacted by disconnection.





When Your Partner Says, “I’m Not Mad, I’m Fine,” but Obviously They Are Mad


Instead of:

“Why can’t you just admit you’re mad?”

Try:

“I feel some tension and I can give you space right now. At the same time, the tension is stressful for me, so at some point I need for us to be able to have a conversation.”

Or:

“I can understand why you might not feel safe saying you’re mad because in the past it’s only made things worse to talk about it. At the same time, my body can feel the tension and I need to know we can address this at some point.”

Or, if you think it might land:

“What would help me right now is to know whether your distance is about me or not. If it is, I can handle it and we can talk now or later. Either way, unspoken distance can’t work for me. The tension is too much.”

Or, if they aren’t fully in touch with their anger and have a hard time putting it to words:

“If you were mad earlier today, what might you have been mad about?”

Or:

“Maybe you shut down like that because you’re afraid it’s wrong to be mad, or shameful or dangerous. Does any of that fit?”

Sometimes it can help to bring it up in the moment, but sometimes it’s better to bring it up later. When someone is mad and unable to own it, it’s usually because they’re afraid of their own anger and they’re doing everything in their power to hold it in, even when they might not consciously recognize that they’re angry to begin with. While it might not be obvious on the surface, inside they are experiencing uncomfortable and conflicting feelings, and they aren’t going to be able to take in reason or answer questions.

Later, when the dust has settled, share how their anger impacts you, and make a plan for the next time. Don’t expect immediate results. Most of the work in this book takes time to create shifts, but in this case it’s especially true. For someone who’s been trying to hold anger in for a lifetime, there needs to be a lot of safety and trust in place before they’re going to feel safe recognizing it and owning it.

Also, keep in mind that anger needs to be heard and validated. You don’t have to tolerate bad behavior like yelling, or name-calling, and you don’t have to agree with why they’re mad (although you can make sense of how they got there), but do validate the anger because unvalidated anger doesn’t disappear. If you do bring it up in the moment, and you’re self-regulated enough, come from a place of co-regulation instead of questioning.

Keep in mind, your partner might not even know they’re mad. Some people had to learn to stuff their anger so far away—because they learned anger is wrong, dangerous, or shameful—that they genuinely lose touch with the awareness of the feeling, even when it’s there. Others might not want to admit they’re mad, so they can’t answer the question, which will possibly leave them feeling more frustrated. Giving them space to own and feel their feelings is validating. Reflecting the physical signs you observe, when done safely, will help them recognize signs of anger they might not be aware of. Asking them, hypothetically, what they might be mad about allows them to answer with an “out” if it doesn’t fully resonate. While it’s important to allow their feelings to be their own instead of a construct, nine times out of ten their answer ends up being accurate and they can start working toward owning it and talking about it. Being curious about their relationship with anger (fear, shame) allows for recognition, reflection, and deeper conversation, planting seeds of awareness.





When You Aren’t Feeling Validated


Instead of:

“You don’t even care about my feelings. Why can’t you just tell me you understand my feelings?”

Try:

“I don’t need for you to agree with me about anything. I just want to feel seen for the fact that I feel sad/angry/alone. It will help me feel safe and close to you.”

Or:

“You have your reasons for thinking I shouldn’t feel the way I do. I want to know more about them. Whatever they are, they’re understandable. At the same time, I can’t feel safe and close to you if I don’t feel validated. Both of us need validation, not just me. Let’s work together.”

Or:

“I understand how uncomfortable my anger can make you. I think it might feel threatening to you when I’m mad, but I need to know there’s space in the relationship for all of me, including sometimes my anger. I’m responsible for how I express it to you, but I can’t feel close to you if I have to hide it.”

Telling someone they don’t care and must validate you is itself invalidating. But the other responses are validating, which model the very thing you’re wanting in return. By validating your partner, you’re teaching them both how to validate and how good it feels to be validated. These responses create safety by telling your partner they don’t need to agree, which helps them maintain their sense of self and equality. They can plant seeds of awareness to help your partner recognize they never received validation and help them make sense of why it’s so hard, instead of leaving them feeling like a failure.





When You Need to Know You’re Appreciated


Instead of:

“I’m tired of you putting me down all the time.”

Try:

“The only way I can truly feel safe and close to you is to know you appreciate what I bring to this relationship. Even when I can’t be perfect, I need to know you see my strengths.”

Or:

“Your concerns are real and I know I’ve done things in the past that have let you down. At the same time, sometimes I feel like I hear much more about what I’m getting wrong and it leaves me feeling demoralized and alone. How you view me is so important to me and I’m needing to hear about the good things, too.”

Protests are unlikely to be heard, and “all the time” is going to leave your partner feeling misunderstood or invalidated for their concerns. The alternative responses, on the other hand, set gentle, attachment-friendly boundaries: “I want to feel close” instead of “you versus me.” They are clear about asking for needs to be met, while still validating that your partner’s concerns matter to you.





When You Feel Disappointed


Instead of:

Sulking, being passive-aggressive, getting defensive

Try:

“I’m disappointed that we’re not going on the trip. It feels bad, but I know I’ll get past it. It’s better for me to put words to it than to hold it in.”

Or:

“I know it can be hard for you when I’m disappointed about something and I can relate to that. It feels awful. At the same time, I need to know I can have space for all of my feelings.”

Disappointment can be anxiety-provoking or even scary for people who were mistreated or given the silent treatment when their parents were disappointed. These behaviors can create abandonment fear and even can be re-traumatizing. That said, disappointment is a part of life. Making safe space for it is invaluable. The suggested responses will help your partner know you’ll come back, that you aren’t going away forever. It sets gentle boundaries around your right to be disappointed.





When You Need Reassurance


Instead of:

Not asking for reassurance in order to avoid feeling rejected

Try:

“Can you help me feel reassured that even if I say no, you’ll still see me as a good partner?”

Or:

“Can you help me feel reassured that if I talk about my own needs, you won’t see me as needy?”

Or:

“Can you help me feel reassured that if I share my emotions with you, you won’t see me as ‘too much’?”

Or:

“Can you help me feel reassured that if I talk about my feelings, you won’t see me as weak?”

Avoiding rejection obstructs connection. Not asking for reassurance misses an important opportunity to reverse negative beliefs created during childhood (or other impactful adult relationships). When partners consistently reassure each other when they’re experiencing issues that trigger core fears of abandonment and shame, they will help reverse each other’s core fears on a deep level. As this transformation takes place, the need for reassurance will dissipate. It likely won’t disappear completely—we all need reassurance from time to time—but consistent reassurance will help you be braver to risk vulnerability, which will help you feel connected.





When You’re Feeling Grumpy and It’s Not About Your Partner


Instead of:

Taking your anger out on your partner

Or:

Not sharing your feelings and leaving your partner wondering if it’s about them

Try:

“I had a bad day and it’s hard for me to be present right now, but it’s not about my feelings toward you. I just need some time to decompress.”

Taking your anger out on your partner is destructive and doesn’t give you the opportunity to work through your feelings, while leaving your partner in the dark is anxiety-provoking. They are much more likely to tolerate your feelings and show up compassionately if they aren’t left in the dark and anxious. They need reassurance you’ll come back in order to feel safe.





When Your Partner Is Feeling Grumpy and You’re Feeling Anxious


Instead of:

Walking on eggshells

Or:

Being mad at them for being grumpy

Or:

Taking it personally

Try:

“I’m sensing distance from you right now and I feel really uncomfortable. Can I just check it out with you to see if this has something to do with me? It will help me feel less anxious.”

Or:

“It’s important to me that you get the space you need to sort it all out and I know I haven’t been able to give you that space in the past. I can do that now, but I need to know you’ll talk to me about it when you’re ready.”

Walking on eggshells takes away from your own peace of mind and blocks the opportunity for compassion. Thinking your partner’s mood is about you when it’s not creates misunderstanding and disconnection. The alternative approaches directly communicate your need, and set gentle boundaries, while still allowing space for your partner to have their feelings. They are not shaming.





When You Need to Set a Boundary Around Yelling, Name-Calling, Being Mean


Instead of:

“You’re violating my boundaries and I won’t reinforce this behavior. You have no right to throw these tantrums and act like a big baby.”

Try:

“I can’t live with being yelled at and called names because it will affect my good feelings toward you and I want to protect myself, you, and the relationship from that. I’m going to need to leave the room if I’m being yelled at, and we’ll have to come back to it later.”

Or:

“I can’t feel safe and close when you’re yelling. Help me be open to you by saying what you need to say in a way that I can hear you.”

Or:

“The real you is hiding underneath your words right now. I can see you’re hurt. Let’s not do this. Can I hold your hand?”

Or:

(if things aren’t changing) “I can’t stand here being talked to like that. (firm tone) Your feelings are real and matter, but the way you’re expressing them is not okay. It feels horrible. If it continues, I’m going to need to…” (whatever you need to do to take care of yourself)

Boundaries are necessary, but when they are shared in a way that leaves your partner feeling like the enemy, they disrupt attachment security. Nobody thrives when they feel like the enemy. If you can co-regulate your partner (which isn’t always easy when they’re being mean), it’s probably going to be the most effective option. These responses also validate your partner’s feelings without approving of or encouraging their behavior. Some partners weren’t raised with healthy boundaries so they will need a firmer approach. Boundaries create clarity and safe parameters, and for many people, setting boundaries is very vulnerable because it brings up abandonment fears (“If I set limits, I’ll be seen as mean, unreasonable, or undeserving, and I’ll be rejected”). But nothing moves forward in a relationship without them. Boundaries help teach people how to treat us, and that’s only fair to both parties. Some people don’t initially respond to boundaries in the most supportive way because it might feel threatening. In the end most people appreciate having clarity about where they stand. Boundaries eliminate the guesswork and are safe for all. It will take consistency and follow-through but if you want the relationship to work, it’s necessary.





When Your Partner Is Sad


Instead of:

“Don’t be sad, look at the bright side…”

Try:

“I’m so sorry you’re suffering. I can feel how hard this is on you. I’m right here. You can talk about it or we can just sit in silence… whatever you need.”

The only way out of hard feelings is through. Give yourself a moment to take that in. Instead of trying to go around the bad feeling, or make it go away for someone else or yourself, we need to give it space to exist. Try to breathe and move through it instead of fighting it. Listen to it and learn from it. If you try the first approach, it might get in the way of your partner’s ability to work through their sadness. It’s also invalidating and sends the message “it’s not okay to feel” or “your feelings are too much for me to handle.” By being a supportive presence, you can help them feel less anxious about having the feelings to begin with. They’ll feel less alone, which is healing.





When You Want to Bring Up the Topic of Getting Help for the Relationship or Working on the Relationship


Instead of:

“We have to go to therapy and if you won’t go that means you don’t care about our relationship as much as I do.”

Or:

Anything that sends the message “We need therapy so you can see what you’re doing wrong.”

Try:

“I understand your resistance to therapy. Of course you don’t want to feel ganged up on and feel worse. At the same time, what we’re doing isn’t working and I feel shut out and alone.”

Or:

“I can see how you think therapy can make things worse, and I agree that risk is real. At the same time, I don’t feel okay with how things are going between us. I feel sad, alone, and frustrated a lot of the time, and I believe that not getting help is also a real risk.”

Or:

“You’re right. It’s a sacrifice of time and money and I know you need to protect us from any more stress. I appreciate the cautious part of you. That makes sense to me and I appreciate your cautiousness because in so many ways it helps me feel safe. At the same time, I don’t feel safe right now because I’m worried about our relationship, which is the most important thing we have. I feel protective of us, too.”

Or:

(if you’ve decided therapy is necessary for you to stay in the relationship) “I’m not happy with the way things are. I would like to get help. If you’re not willing to do that, I’m not sure I’m willing to stay in this. It’s too painful to fight so much and feel so far away. This is not how I want a relationship to feel.”

The truth is that most people avoid therapy for reasons other than simply not caring about the relationship. Demanding, even demanding healthy things, sends the message that your partner’s ideas or free will don’t matter. If your partner associates therapy with a demand, it won’t be a safe topic. If your partner has any reason to believe the goal of therapy is for them to be fixed, they might feel shamed or invalidated by both you and the therapist, and won’t feel safe to go. Ultimately, it’s impossible to make someone go to therapy. Trying to force them to go becomes part of the problem. But you can create the right environment, validate their resistance, and influence them. You need to share how you and the relationship will be impacted, especially from an attachment perspective—“If we can’t improve things, I can’t feel close”—but ultimately you can’t control them. If they feel there’s space for their feelings and they aren’t being forced, they will more likely be open to the idea eventually.

Another piece is trying to understand more about why they are closed off to the idea of therapy. How is their resistance a misguided attempt for them to feel safe? If the explanation is narrowed down to “you just don’t care,” the opportunity is missed to better understand what’s really going on.





When You Perceive Your Partner Is Taking Your Concern as a Criticism


Instead of:

“Stop being so sensitive.”

Try:

“I know in the past I’ve delivered concerns to you in a way that has left you feeling attacked. I’m committed to sharing things in a new way so you don’t feel that way. I also need to know you’re willing to hear me.”

Or:

“You’re a good partner and I appreciate you for more reasons than I can list. And I don’t like this (certain behavior) and to feel close I need to know there’s space for me to be heard.”

Telling someone they’re “so sensitive” is invalidating, and sends the message that their feelings don’t matter, are too much, or stem from the fact that they are flawed as a person. But acknowledging how the past has contributed to insecurity is validating and healing. Holding two truths at once—that your partner needs to feel safe and that you need to be heard—encourages teamwork and collaboration.





When You Feel Misunderstood


Instead of:

“That’s not what I said!”

Or:

“That’s not what I meant.”

Try:

“I think we’re missing each other. Let’s take a pause and try to understand each other. I’m right here.”

It might be true that you were misunderstood, but when that message is delivered as a protest, before emotional safety has been established, it will block the ability to reach each other.

Taking time to connect before clarifying will create the emotional safety needed for your message to land. This approach sends the message that your goal is to understand them. Adding “I’m right here” is simple enough to reach your partner’s nervous system and can be co-regulating.





When You Say Something in the Most Perfect Way Possible and Your Partner Still Becomes Reactive


Instead of:

“No matter how I say it, you refuse to listen. Why should I even bother?”

Try:

“I completely understand why it’s hard for you to take in what I’m saying. Given our history it’s probably hard for you to believe it’s heartfelt. But our relationship is important to me and I know that if we can’t reach each other we’re both going to feel awful. Would you be willing to try to let me in even when part of you doesn’t want to?”

Or:

“I can tell something big came up for you. What are you hearing me say?”

When you communicate in an open, loving way, and aren’t received, it’s enormously frustrating because your vulnerability is being dropped. But you’ll undo that work if you follow it up with a protest, like the first option, which lacks vulnerability and validation. Providing validation for your partner’s block can be a powerful way to get in. The new approaches might not get the response you’re looking for immediately, but you will probably be heard (even if it’s not apparent), planting seeds for future growth and connection. You will model to your partner what you’re hoping to get in return, to build as your communication style together. The second approach, in particular, can be co-regulating. It allows space for your partner to build awareness around their trigger and your curiosity will send the message you care. It will give you an opportunity to validate their feelings. This can create the safety needed for you to be heard.

It bears repeating that conversations like this do not always solve the problem right then and there. It’s like choosing an apple over a donut because you want to eat healthier. Rationally it makes sense, but emotionally everything in you wants the donut. And while you might notice feeling better right away by choosing the apple, you might not. Your body might not respond immediately with positive feedback. You might feel worse. You might have to battle hard feelings of deprivation. You might think, “Why bother? I don’t feel any better and one apple won’t make a difference.” And you’re right, one apple won’t make a difference in your overall health. But if you keep choosing the apple over and over, day after day, it will start to make a difference.

Words, along with comforting touch, can help you address tough issues, while creating a new way of relating to one another over time. Getting vulnerable and reacting differently than you have been, and were raised to, can be challenging, especially when triggered. But if you can take a moment to check in with yourself, regulate, and validate your partner, while using attachment-friendly language, you create more safety for you both and more room for secure love.





Conclusion Going Forward in the World with Secure Love





As an avid skier, I love living in Montana, where the powder is often fresh… but the temps are low. I can bundle up easily, except for my toes. This year, I tried out electrically heated socks. After a couple of wears, I called the ski shop to see if I was doing something wrong because they didn’t seem to be heating up. “You won’t feel the heat in your toes,” they explained. “You just won’t feel the cold anymore.”

When you have a secure attachment, you’ll feel a strong sense of connection to your partner, but a lot of the time security is less about what you do feel and more about what you don’t feel. In other words, the room you’re in together won’t have a chill in the air; there won’t be a palpable sense of hostility or a palpable sense of negative energy. Most of the time your toes won’t be cold. Being less distracted by discomfort so much of the time will create space for moments of heightened connection. What is most of the time? I think a good rule of thumb is that at least 80 percent of the time you are either consciously aware of positive feelings about your partner and the relationship, or you have a subconscious felt sense of “all is well.” It’s a sense of security that’s just there, hovering in the background. The other 20 percent of the time isn’t awful per se, maybe there’s some anxiety or tension in the air, you’re in an active negative cycle, or you’re trying to find your way back to each other via the repair process. If 80 percent sounds too low for you, that’s okay, too. This book is predominantly written for couples in distress, so for a lot of readers 80 percent is a major improvement. Ideally I’d like to see all couples achieve this “felt sense of security” closer to 90 percent of the time, but I also like to set up realistic expectations. Putting consistent effort into practicing the principles of this book and doing the work to maintain an attachment-friendly environment will help that happen, but, of course, all couples start their journey at different places.

Another way to assess your emerging attachment security is to take a look at your negative cycles. Negative cycles are a great way to gauge relationship growth. To start, you’ll notice that you’re having fewer negative cycles, and by fewer I mean fewer, not none. Fewer matters because fewer negative cycles leads to fewer bad feelings leads to fewer negative cycles leads to fewer bad feelings leads to more space for good feelings, and on and on it goes, building upon itself. You might have to step back and eye the relationship from afar to really notice the change. Take a moment and ask yourself, “Are we fighting less? Are we talking through our hard topics with greater ease? Are we better at finding solutions to our problems outside of negative cycles?” Better yet, have this conversation together.

When I’m working with a couple, I don’t define their success by perfection; I define it by signs of growth. As I was explaining this concept to a couple I used to treat, one of the partners said, “What you’re saying is you want to see a positive trend with peaks and valleys.”

That was exactly right. From that day forward I’ve shown my patients the growth I’m looking for in this graph:



As you can see, and as I’ve already mentioned, growth isn’t linear. And I don’t mean growth isn’t linear sometimes; I mean growth isn’t linear ever. It simply doesn’t work that way—humans are far more complicated, with too many variables at play, many of which are out of a couple’s control, such as bad moods or global pandemics. If you notice on the graph, once couples start growing, even when they backslide, they never go back to square one. Square one is awareness. Once you become aware of the concepts of attachment, it’s not something you can unlearn—even when things seem to completely unravel, you’ll still have your foundation of awareness to draw upon when you’re ready. Another thing you might notice is that the down spurts are almost always followed by growth spurts. The downward spurts are often opportunities to work on deeper problems that finally feel safe to surface—it’s as if the relationship is saying, “We’re strong enough to work through this now.” Once it’s worked through, the couple experiences greater growth.

If a couple is experiencing consistent growth of positively trending upward with peaks and valleys, I consider this success. And all couples start at different places. If a couple comes to me feeling good in the relationship 60 percent of the time and after a few weeks, they’re up to 70 percent, that is growth. But if a couple comes to me feeling good in the relationship only 10 percent of the time, and after a few weeks they’re at 20 percent, that’s growth, too. Or perhaps when I start seeing a couple, they’re having negative cycles anywhere from one to three times a week. After a few weeks, if they are getting through the week with one, or going a full two weeks with none, that is growth. Success is at least in part defined by where they started. Relationships, of course, are more complicated than what approximate percentages or numbers can adequately describe, but you can at least use these numbers as a general guide to assess your growth as a couple.

Some couples are always in a “baseline” negative cycle, never really feeling entirely good with each other, and then have spikes of escalation. Growth for them might look like fewer spikes at first. In between spikes they might not feel fully close, but at least they’re fighting less and we have something to build upon.

This brings me to another common scenario. Most of the couples I treat will report to me that they’re fighting less, but feeling even more distant. I liken it to a bucket of water: When we start doing the work, their bucket of is full of dirty water. As we work to stabilize negative cycles, we slowly empty the bucket. Long term, we want to fill the bucket up with clean water: closeness, increased trust, higher levels of emotional and physical intimacy, and closer friendship. But there is a period between emptying the bucket and filling it back up when the bucket is just empty. There’s no fighting, but there’s not really any bonding, either. If you’ve experienced this, it’s normal. We need to use this space to continue having deeper repair conversations around old wounds (go back to repair in chapter 7) and building bonds.

Speaking of repair, couples who are moving toward secure attachment will notice they repair faster than in the past. Some couples at the beginning of their journey toward healing will not talk for days, or even weeks, after a rupture. For them, a faster repair might look like a couple of days instead of a week. For some couples, they might find they can repair after an hour, or even after a few short minutes. Another way to assess repairs is seeing if they are more complete, deeper. Do you feel a stronger sense of resolution? Are you holding less resentment?

Vulnerability is necessary for repair, but it takes time, and practice, to work up the courage to be vulnerable. Nobody can go directly from “I’m terrified my vulnerability will be too much for you and I’ll feel rejected” to “I’m putting it all on the table, I need to know my needs matter to you.” You have to work up to it. When you talk about what happened and try to repair, are you being more vulnerable than in the past?

Another way to assess your level of growth is by how “negative” your negative cycles are. Are you still getting escalated, but not as high? Are you staying engaged longer than you used to? Are you calling names or yelling less? Are you noticing more validation and listening before getting defensive or deflecting criticism? Are you feeling less yucky when it’s all over? Again, we’re looking for improvement, not perfection. And you might still backtrack and have ugly cycles—but are they overall less ugly?

Finally, think about problem-solving. Are you finding it easier to work through decisions both big and small? Are you able to better understand and respect each other’s perspectives? Are you allowing time for decisions to be made instead of taking the approach of “we need to make this decision right this second”? Are you better able to tolerate the unknown? Are you finding it easier to bring up difficult topics, even just a little, or are you bringing them up anyway despite your fear? Have you noticed any evidence of growth and do you have hope the growth will continue as you continue to work at it?

I hope that by now, you’re able to look at your relationship and see that you and your partner have fewer negative cycles, they’re less miserable when you do have them, and you’re able to make repairs faster. If this is the case, this is no small feat. Celebrate that! You have done really difficult work, and it speaks volumes about your emerging attachment security. Remember, negative cycles are fueled by insecure attachment, so if your negative cycles are improving, you and your relationship are becoming more secure. The two go hand in hand.





Beyond Secure Attachment


Securely attached partners spend far less time working on their relationship, and far more time enjoying their relationship—which is working on the relationship if you consider how much resilience is created when two people take time to enjoy each other. Secure attachment isn’t just about “not fighting,” or “not having negative cycles.”

Again, no relationships, even the ones with the most trust and security, are perfect. I think of my own relationship. My husband and I love to do certain things together, especially outdoorsy activities, but on any given late evening, you might find him downstairs watching foreign films and me upstairs watching football or reading a mystery novel with a strong, British female lead. That’s just us. There are no rules about what a secure relationship should look like—as long as they have an attachment-friendly environment, secure couples find all sorts of ways to thrive.

With that said, here are some things securely attached couples are doing—what you might find yourself doing now that your energy isn’t being drained by the negative cycles.





Just Being


Because you now have a felt sense of security, you may just be going about life not even consciously thinking about your partner. Without the constant swirling fears or insecurities or worries, you are freed up to focus on other things. That doesn’t mean you ignore your partner, but relationship anxieties aren’t a constant undercurrent or distraction. Maybe you’re engaged in work or a hobby. Maybe you’re with other friends or family. Maybe you’re in the same room as your partner doing separate things. You’re fine. You both know you can reach each other if you need to, that you are loved and cared for, and that you will have plenty of moments of engagement when the time comes.





Having Fun


As a securely attached couple, you will have your own unique ways of having fun together. Some couples might love going to art galleries and concerts, having family and friend time, watching or playing sports, laughing and joking, having sex, going to dinner, getting out in nature, shopping, watching movies, playing with pets, taking long drives, taking long walks, listening to music, traveling, playing video games, and doing anything else under the sun. It doesn’t have to be anything fancy, just shared moments of joy. I recently asked social media followers what brings joy to their relationship. One woman has a husband who prints out tiny animals for her from his 3-D printer. Another follower and her partner love to work through crossword puzzles while they cook (impressive). Most happy couples like to have fun in separate ways, and that’s important, too, but they have at least a few ways in which they have fun together, and they make time for it. Also, they don’t compare themselves to other couples in this sense or any other, which gets in the way of enjoying what you have.





Sharing Experiences and Feelings


Securely attached couples talk to each other about their experiences in the world. You might talk about your day at work, or events from your childhood, or about your dinner with a friend. It could be anything. The happiest of couples go out into the world and have experiences to come back and share with their partners. This is one reason the Covid-19 pandemic was especially hard on couples—they weren’t having separate experiences to share with each other. As a securely attached couple, you don’t just talk about details and facts; you share your feelings about events: “It really hurt my feelings when my boss said…” instead of a long story limited to surface details, which can be overwhelming and, without emotional significance, sometimes boring. You also know how to share in a way that is considerate, you have good listening skills, and you can set boundaries when needed: “Honey, what you have to say is so important to me. Right now I’m just too tired to be a good listener. Would you mind telling me about this tomorrow?” or “Let’s put a pause on this and pick it up tomorrow when I can listen better.”





Connecting with Other People


Securely attached partners have other people in their lives to talk to and connect with. Sometimes your best friend, family member, or coworker will be the one to give you the emotional validation you’re needing in a moment. Or sometimes you stick with self-validation because that feels good, too. Sometimes a certain story you want to tell will be better appreciated by another person in your life than by your partner.

Securely attached partners meet most of each other’s needs, most of the time. You are each other’s primary support, but you aren’t each other’s only support. And just to clarify, I’m not saying if you don’t have strong relationships with other people, or if you don’t share private details about your relationship or partner with others, that means you’re insecurely attached. Remember, every couple is different.





Nurturing the Relationship


Securely attached partners spend more time nurturing their relationship than they spend repairing it. The nurturing you will put in now that things feel better will prevent you from having to do a lot of repairing. Examples of nurturing include: being considerate of each other’s space and boundaries; doing little things for each other, like remembering to grab oat milk creamer at the market because you know that’s what your partner likes in their coffee; being tolerant of minor mistakes; speaking to each other respectfully and lovingly; helping each other out around the house; sharing chores and responsibilities; making time for physical touch and connection; sharing emotions; having good manners; asking about each other’s day and taking the time to listen; being curious; being each other’s biggest fan.





Protecting the Relationship


Securely attached partners are cognizant of protecting the relationship. Now that you’ve put in all this work, you are far more likely to think about what you do or say and how it might land with your partner. You’ve learned to prevent negative cycles and you’ll probably continue to actively practice doing so. You won’t do things behind your partner’s back that might interfere with their sense of trust or teamwork. You won’t try to control each other. You will protect the relationship from damage in the same way you would protect your material goods from damage. And hopefully, once you’ve reached this security, protecting the relationship in this way isn’t necessarily work; it’s more of a natural state of consideration.





Go Be Secure; Go Be Imperfect


Congratulations, you’re on a path toward healing. Just by reading this book you’ve shown your commitment to creating a better relationship and a better environment for you and your loved ones. You’ve grown, you’ve connected, you can move forward in security, happiness, and meaning. The journey is never over but you’ve done something brave—you’ve chosen vulnerability. By choosing vulnerability, you’ve opened yourself up to the experience of real love, real connection, and lasting growth. Relish it! Maybe celebrate with your partner, together.

Years ago, I was treating a client in her early twenties who was struggling with perfectionism. At the end of our session, I grabbed a Post-it note, jotted down “Go be imperfect,” and pinned it next to my door, telling her, “This is for you; go be imperfect.” I left it there and all my other clients liked it so much that I eventually put it in a tiny little frame and made it permanent. To this day it still hangs next to my office door. So, just like all the clients who leave my office at the end of their session, I will leave you with this: make secure attachment your goal, but don’t let a quest for the perfect relationship get in the way of the “good-enough” relationship. Make “good-enough” your goal and you might find that “good-enough” is exactly what you’ve been looking for. So… go be imperfect.





Appendix


Childhood Experiences of Avoidant Attachment Caregiver Behavior

Avoidant Child Strategies

Benefit of Child’s Strategy (subconscious)

Downside of Child’s Strategy



Caregiver ignores or shames child’s expression of emotions.

“It’s best to not acknowledge my emotional self. What’s the point? It’s better to push it out of my awareness.”

“If I don’t have feelings I’ll never have to feel rejected or shamed.”

Child becomes disconnected from their emotional self. Without awareness of this part, child can’t learn to communicate and manage feelings.



When child is emotionally distressed, caregiver focuses on “fix it” approach.

“The best way to manage painful feelings is to use logic and reason to fix my problems.”

“If I’m good at fixing my problems, I’ll never have them. If I never have problems, I’ll never have to feel painful feelings.”

Child doesn’t learn to seek comfort from others or to understand and comfort their own feelings when upset. As they age they’ll have problems connecting with the inner worlds of others.



Caregiver sends the message (verbally or nonverbally) “don’t talk about your feelings.”

“It’s not safe to talk about my feelings. People who talk about feelings are weak and less-than.”

“If I keep my feelings to myself I’ll be acceptable.”

Child learns to hide parts of self, which can cause feelings of emptiness.

They might develop disdain of self or others for showing feelings.



Caregiver overly focuses on success and appearance, with little focus on child’s feelings and thoughts.

“My worthiness wholly depends on whether or not I can do a good job, get it right, and how others view me.”

“If I can get it right in the eyes of others, I’ll be viewed as worthy.”

Child doesn’t learn to connect to their inner world.

Child might become anxious about being successful.

Child might paradoxically become an underachiever (“I can’t keep up so why bother?”).



Caregiver creates an environment that heavily rewards independence.

“I have to know how to do everything on my own. Asking for help is weak.”

“Being able to do it all on my own and figure things out on my own is how I feel competent and acceptable.”

Child doesn’t develop healthy interdependence.

Child develops the idea that asking for help is a sign of weakness.

Child associates interdependence with a loss of self.



Caregiver shames child for making mistakes or misbehaving. Sends messages that “you’re bad, you’re failing,” instead of labeling the behavior as wrong, and instead of using missteps as learning opportunities.

“Worthy people don’t make mistakes or mess up.”

“If I work hard to get it right all the time, I won’t have to feel unacceptable in the eyes of others. I can only feel good about myself if I never mess up.”

Child will become defensive to real or perceived criticism.

Child will struggle accepting their own imperfections, which can be anxiety provoking. Child might struggle to accept the imperfections of others, which can get in the way of closeness and connection.



Caregiver is emotionally intrusive: doesn’t have good boundaries, overshares with child, tries to coerce child into sharing their feelings, or becomes upset when child shares their feelings.

“Close relationships are smothering.”

“My feelings make others upset.”

“If I want to maintain my sense of self, I need to push away closeness.”

“I need to keep my feelings to myself so I don’t upset others.”

Shutting out all closeness blocks child from experiencing fulfilling connection with others.



Childhood Experiences of Anxious Attachment Caregiver Behavior

Anxious Child Strategies

Benefit of Child’s Strategy (subconscious)

Downside to Child



When child is upset, caregiver doesn’t give predictable responses. At times they might respond positively. Other times they respond with anxiety, overwhelm, or anger.

“I have to fight to be seen, heard, understood, and comforted.”

“If I keep fighting to be responded to, maybe I’ll get my needs met. Getting big and protesting gives me hope I won’t end up feeling rejected and alone.”

Child’s nervous system is chronically activated; child develops conflicting feelings of longing for connection yet anger at having to fight so hard.



Caregiver’s emotional and/or physical presence comes and goes.

“I have to learn to pay close attention to any signs my caregiver will go away and I’ll be left alone.”

“If I stay close and keep them in eyesight, I won’t feel abandoned.”

Child’s energy is put toward maintaining safety with the caregiver, and taken away from learning and growing.



Caregiver is too overwhelmed with their own feelings to be emotionally present with child or meet child’s emotional needs.

“I can’t trust that my caregiver can show up for me emotionally. I have to make my feelings bigger than theirs so they will see how much I need help.”

“I’ve learned that if I get big enough, my caregiver will finally be able to see me.”

Child gets stuck in an exhausting pattern of protesting to be heard and responded to.

Child isn’t modeled self-regulation.



Caregiver overreacts or becomes anxious or dysregulated when child is upset.

“If my big feelings are enough to trigger my caregiver, that must mean I’m too much for others to handle.”

“Maybe I should try harder to keep my feelings to myself so I’m not viewed by others as too much.”

Child develops a conflict between the fear of being “too much” and the longing for being responded to. The conflict is exhausting and leaves them unsure of how to reach for their needs to be met. They are torn between being “too much” or being ignored.



Caregiver’s emotional closeness is inconsistent. Sometimes they can connect, sometimes they can’t connect.

“It feels so good to connect but then it goes away and I feel dropped. Connection can’t be trusted because it’s always followed by disappointment.”

“I long for closeness but at the same time I don’t trust it when I get it, so I subconsciously push it away to protect myself from disappointment. Sometimes when I do get the closeness I long for it reminds me of how angry I am that it’s not predictable.”

Child carries a mistrust of closeness that blocks their ability to relax and fully enjoy the good moments in relationships out of a legitimate fear that “good things eventually go away.”



Childhood Experiences of Disorganized Attachment Caregiver Behavior

Message Received by Child

Response of Child



Overall climate that is punitive/hostile/rejecting/abusive

“The very people I need for love and protection are also dangerous. I’m so confused and I don’t know where to turn.”

Child has to manage their human longings for connection, protection, and care alongside feelings of fear and mistrust. This leaves child feeling inner confusion and chaos. Child is left to manage their problems and big feelings on their own. The loneliness creates feelings of despair.



Caregiver dissociates (appears to “go blank,” “go away,” to child)

“I’m alone. At any moment my caregiver might disappear. I see them but I don’t feel them. I’m confused and scared.”

Frightening experience for child to manage the conflict of physical presence, but emotional absence.



Caregiver has unresolved trauma (trauma that isn’t being managed or healed)

“I never know when my caregiver is going to get triggered and take it out on me.”

Child can never feel fully safe because at any given moment a situation can become frightening, or because the environment is so chaotic. Child gets stuck between needing comfort and safety, but being too afraid to reach for it.



Caregiver is afraid of child

“I overwhelm my caregiver and push them away. I’m threatening. I don’t have a ‘wiser, stronger’ helper to protect and guide me. I’m alone.”

Child has nowhere to turn when they need help. Child feels alone and a deep sense of shame.



Caregiver uses child as attachment figure

“I’m responsible for my caregiver’s feelings. Who is responsible for me? Being responsible for an adult is too much. I don’t know how.”

Child feels overwhelmed, unsupported, and alone. Child feels like a chronic failure for not being able to keep caregiver happy.



Chronic marital conflict and/or domestic violence

“My environment is unsafe. Nobody is here to protect me from fear and harm.”

Child doesn’t feel valuable enough to be protected. Child is modeled fighting and violence and will learn to behave in this way. Without anyone to help them make sense of the situation, child will blame themselves.



Predatory behavior toward child (glaring, baring teeth)

“My caregivers are terrifying. If I mess up I’ll be harmed. My environment is never really safe.”

Child learns to fear what should be the source of comfort. This creates intense confusion, distress, lack of safety, and apprehension about reaching for support.



Common Relationship Feelings

Sad

empty

demoralized

powerless

longing

lost

heartbroken

dejected

lonely

despairing

hurt

unheard

unseen

dismissed

misunderstood

undervalued

Angry

annoyed

frustrated

enraged

critical

irritated

hostile

indignant

resentful

mad

fuming

Afraid

terrified

confused

anxious

insecure

overwhelmed

nervous

panicky

agitated

worried

alarmed

Ashamed

inadequate

stupid

less than

embarrassed

rejected

devalued

humiliated

guilty

not enough

Positive Feelings

close

connected

seen

understood

cared for

valued

warm

safe

secure

appreciated

supported

loved

accepted

calm

worthy

competent

empowered



Negative Cycle “Moves” of Avoidant-Attached Partner Avoidant Strategies to Manage Emotions

Perceived Benefit (subconscious)

Downside



Stuffing down painful feelings; pretending they don’t exist

Partner can partially and/or temporarily protect themselves from being overwhelmed by painful feelings, or from creating conflict.

Can’t access or express feelings; feelings will be acted out in unhelpful/destructive behaviors; doesn’t recognize the need for emotional comfort; doesn’t learn to communicate and manage negative emotions in ways that can lead to bonding.



Sees childhood experiences through “rose-colored glasses”; minimizes negative childhood experiences

By maintaining an imbalanced view, partner doesn’t have to see family in a negative light, which might bring up shame from the idea that “if my parents are broken, that makes me broken,” or might bring up painful feelings of being disloyal to family they love.

Partner can’t see how negative childhood experiences have impacted their present circumstances. Problems remain a mystery or someone else’s fault. Simplistic view of relationships: can’t view families or others as “whole” with both strengths and weaknesses.



Thinks that all their problems would be solved if only they could get it right

Partner uses shame as a way to motivate themselves to do better, a strategy that relies on a supply of toxic shame. Partner believes that if they’re the “bad guy” they can be the one to change; everything will be okay and they won’t lose their partner.

Taking on shame can lead to stress, anxiety, mental illness, addictions, and substance abuse. Trying to take on all the blame in the relationship (whether in the big picture or in moments) can get in the way of setting healthy boundaries and blocks authentic connection. Shame blocks vulnerability.



Verbalizing and/or believing the relationship is “fine,” even when there is evidence to the contrary

In the avoidant partner’s mind, if the relationship is “fine,” they don’t have to face conflict, which is uncomfortable and overwhelming. If they can convince their partner that the relationship is “fine,” their partner will stop bringing up concerns and/or is more likely to stay in the relationship.

Denying real relationship problems keeps problems from being addressed and resolved. Denial of problems leaves their partner feeling alone, confused, and desperate for connection and resolution.



Viewing or accusing anxious partner as “overly emotional or sensitive”; minimizing partner’s feelings

If the avoidant partner can convince the anxious partner they are the problem because they’re too sensitive, they can make sense of the situation and/or not have to face their own flaws and shame.

Putting blame solely on the anxious partner blocks uncovering deeper unmet needs in the relationship and blocks healing.



Avoiding conflict

Avoid feelings of shame, overwhelm, anger, or fear of losing partner. Avoid big fights that will harm the relationship.

Relationship problems aren’t addressed or resolved; no opportunity to learn how to manage conflict in a way that is safe for both partners. Bonding opportunities are missed because healthy conflict makes space for vulnerability.



Distancing from relationship

As negative cycles damage the relationship, avoidant partners will distance from the relationship in order to distance from the pain the relationship has come to represent, including feelings such as shame from feeling like a failure, despair, and/or fear.

“Checking out” doesn’t make space for healing; creates feelings of emptiness; adds to distance; leaves both partners feeling alone.



Seeking comfort elsewhere (excessive work, hobbies, addictions, other romantic or nonromantic relationships, etc.)

When avoidant partner associates the relationship with pain, failure, and emotional overwhelm, they can fill their void of emptiness and distract from the pain by seeking out other pleasurable activities.

Seeking comfort elsewhere creates distance and blocks the opportunity for real problems to be addressed and healed.



Getting defensive against real or perceived criticism

Avoid being seen as a failure by self or partner.

Defensiveness blocks healthy self-reflection, blocks healthy boundaries, masks deeper feelings, blocks resolution of problems, and leaves partner feeling unheard and invalidated.



Denying their own relationship needs

Won’t have to face disappointment if needs aren’t met; doesn’t want to burden partner and make things worse. If they minimize/deny their relationship needs, they won’t have to risk feeling engulfed.

Can’t self-advocate for needs; inability to respond to self needs can contribute to inability to respond to needs of others; denying one’s own needs breeds resentment.



Deflecting partner’s concerns; counter-blaming when partner brings up concerns: “I’m not the problem, you’re the problem and here’s why…”

The avoidant partner can feel safe, the subconscious logic being “If I can get you to see that you’re the one in the wrong, to see your flaws, it will take the heat off me and I’ll feel safe. I won’t view myself as wrong and shameful and neither will you.”

Their partner feels invalidated, attacked, and unsafe.



Handles anger with passive-aggressiveness and/or biting humor

Doesn’t have to own or take responsibility for their anger, which they perceive as threatening.

Their anger doesn’t get the attention it needs to be addressed, validated, and worked through.



Excessive use of reason and facts to “win” arguments

If they can provide the right evidence, their partner won’t see them as bad or failing, and the problem will have an easy solution.

Overreliance on reason and facts comes at the expense of emotions and deeper meanings. If one partner is “right,” that makes the other partner “wrong,” which gets in the way of the attachment needs to feel respected and understood, which will block emotional safety, vulnerability, and resolution to problems.



Appeasing partner; “keep the peace” at all costs

When avoidant partners appease (say or do what their partner wants them to say or do even when they don’t want to) and work hard to “keep the peace,” they can keep the relationship stable, avoid conflict, and prevent their partner from being disappointed with them.

Relationship issues don’t get addressed or resolved, partners sacrifice authenticity and true intimacy, they carry resentment, and they are at risk for eventually “blowing up” over small events, or over things unrelated to the relationship.



Overvalues their independence

Can avoid feeling “dependent,” weak, and smothered.

Too much independence blocks healthy interdependence, vulnerability, and intimacy. Partner feels pushed away.



Pushes away emotional closeness

By pushing away emotional closeness and/or partner’s reaches for closeness, the avoidant partner doesn’t have to feel like a failure for not knowing how to respond, or engulfed and feeling as if they are losing self to the relationship.

Pushing away connection blocks intimacy and relationship closeness. Even when the avoidant partner doesn’t recognize it, it leaves them feeling empty and alone. It leaves their partner feeling unfulfilled and alone.



Shutting down during conflict

“I’m afraid of conflict and the negative impact it will have on the relationship.” “Shutting down helps me escape feeling overwhelmed.”

Partner feels alone and unsure that the relationship even matters to the partner shutting down. No resolution to problem.



Distancing when their partner asks them about their feelings

“Feelings are weak. If I show them to you, or even to myself, that means I’m weak. If I’m weak, I’m not worthy.”

Partner can’t feel connected; feels alone. Relationship lacks vulnerability and emotional intimacy.



Stonewalling

“I can show you how hurt I am without having to own and express my hurt directly, because that doesn’t feel safe. Then you’ll see me.”

Partner feels powerless, anxious, and left in the dark.



“Fix it”

“If I can make the problem go away by fixing it, we’ll be okay.”

Usually doesn’t address the real problem, which is emotional and attachment issues.



Avoiding difficult topics

By avoiding difficult topics they can avoid difficult feelings or they can avoid conflict and “ruining the moment.”

If there isn’t ample space to address difficult topics, their partner feels unheard and unseen, and nothing gets resolved.



“Moving target” (when someone says they feel a certain way, then quickly shifts and says they don’t feel that way)

If they own their feelings they fear they will be used against them later, or that their feelings might be viewed by themselves or partner as “weak” or “wrong.”

Not being able to own and talk about feelings blocks vulnerability and connection.



Making hurtful comments

If they can get their partner to feel the pain they’re feeling inside, their partner will understand them. Or, making their partner feel “less than” can temporarily help them feel secure within themselves.

Hurtful words are destructive to the relationship because they erode safety and trust.



Negative Cycle “Moves” of Anxious-Attached Partners Anxious Behaviors

Perceived Benefit (subconcious)

Downside



Protesting when feeling unheard, invalidated, un-responded to, and/or misunderstood

Fighting to be heard and seen. If the anxious partner keeps fighting, there’s a chance they’ll get their needs met and won’t have to face feelings of despair and powerlessness.

Protesting decreases the odds they’ll be heard, pushes partner away, and blocks their ability to self-regulate and learn to sit with vulnerable feelings of grief, fear, and shame.



Expressing emotions with “big” intensity

Discharging feelings in a big way releases painful energy, which can feel like a second-best substitute for self-regulation. Can temporarily numb the pain of lack of co-regulation in the relationship.

Is exhausting to their own nervous system and overwhelms their partner’s nervous system. Decreases the odds the real problem will be addressed. Leaves anxious partner feeling ashamed and alone.



Being overly controlling of environment and/or partner

Keeping their environment “perfect” or under control keeps them from feeling anxious when things go wrong and provides a false sense of safety.

Exhausting, can leave partner feeling resentful and/or incompetent, blocks opportunity to learn to regulate through inevitable hard moments and to develop self-trust.



Blaming, criticizing, judging partner

Blaming keeps them from having to face the shame of being too much, wrong, and invalidated for their suffering. It will help them get their partner to see how they’re the problem and they’ll change. If their partner changes they’ll feel safe.

Creates resentment from partner, blocks intimacy; doesn’t create space for self-reflection.



“Filtering for the negative”

Focusing on what is wrong can keep them on alert for what needs to be changed. They won’t feel blindsided when something bad happens.

Focusing on the bad gets in the way of experiencing the good; leaves partner feeling unappreciated for the strengths they bring to the relationship and they will feel demoralized.



“Peppering with questions”

They believe that if they can get enough information somehow they’ll end up feeling safe and reassured.

When reassurance stems from a core fear of being unlovable or from a relationship rupture, no matter how many answers a partner gives it won’t be enough. Partner might feel frustrated by being unable to give the “right” answers.



Testing partner’s love and responsiveness

If their partner can pass the test, they will finally feel loved.

If they have a core fear of being unlovable, even when tests are passed, there will always be more tests.



“Lots of words,” repeating self again and again in conversations

By saying the same thing over and over, they believe they’ll finally be heard.

Overwhelms partner; partner feels no space to be heard; “looping” is a way to defend against vulnerable feelings that need to be faced and addressed. Repeating gets in the way of resolving real problems if partner isn’t listening.



Difficulty ending or taking breaks from arguments

Doesn’t have to be alone with painful feelings; fighting is better than being alone.

Continued fighting in escalated states often leads to behaviors that harm the relationship; blocks opportunity for self-regulation and co-regulation.



Presenting excessive details and “proof,” often repetitively

If they present enough “proof,” they’ll get the validation they’re longing for, and their partner will finally change.

Overfocusing on details can mask bigger meanings and patterns; presenting details can leave partner feeling blamed and misunderstood and invites arguments.



Silent treatment (out of protest; different from avoidant version of silent treatment)

If they “abandon” their partner, their partner will feel how mad and alone they feel and they’ll want to comfort them and change.

Maintains climate of unhealthy communication.



“Raising the bar”

Since “good things” can’t be trusted, anxious partners continue to seek perfection and maintain unreasonable expectations in order to help them feel safe and that one day everything will be okay.

Anxious partner never gets to experience “good enough.” Their partner becomes demoralized because they think that no matter what they do to change or get it right, it will never be enough.



Being emotionally or physically “clingy”

They believe that if they keep their partner close they won’t have to face their abandonment fears.

No amount of closeness or proximity will be enough to cure the fear of abandonment. The fears cannot be worked through when they’re avoided. Partner feels suffocated and pushes away in order to maintain their sense of individuality.



People-pleasing

If their partner is always happy they can feel lovable and safe. This is a way to “soft-control” partner.

Both partners will likely harbor resentment.



“One foot out the door” (when there’s a fight, making threats to leave the relationship as a protest, not an authentic plan to leave)

“If I can scare you into thinking I’m going away, maybe you’ll hear me;” or, “I’m in so much pain all I can do is think about escaping.”

Partner feels confused and hurt, and might take threats seriously. Or, partner might stop taking the threats seriously.



Poking to get partner’s attention

“If I can get a response, any response, I won’t feel alone and disconnected.”

Partner feels scared and abandoned, and doesn’t learn how to respond to healthy reaches for comfort and connection.



Overfocus on partner’s behaviors and growth

Overfocusing on partner keeps them alert to how their partner might let them down. If their partner is “perfect” they will finally get to feel safe.

Pushes partner away; keeps partner from having the space to take ownership of their own growth.



Difficulty recognizing their part of the problem and how it impacts the relationship

They’ve had legitimate experiences of being repeatedly let down, which has left them in a state of blame and the need to change what’s outside of them in order to feel safe inside of them.

They might work hard on the relationship, but without realizing some of what they do to help is making things worse. Since they’re “working” so hard and things aren’t changing, they make sense of it by assuming the partner is the problem.

Stuck mindset. Gets in the way of focusing on self. Blocks vulnerability and self-regulation. Blocks them from seeing and working on their part of the problem that keeps relationship stuck.





Acknowledgments


First and foremost, thank you to my husband, Mario, for supporting me in more ways than I can ever list. You are my rock. You’ve reached for the stars with me and yet you’ve kept me grounded. We’ve been through a lot together and I’m proud of us for never giving up on growth in our partnership and in our parenting. You’ve been telling me for ten years to write a book and when I threw my hands up and said, “There’s no way I can do this,” you were the one to say, “You have to write the book.” The message I received at that moment on the front porch was “I believe in you and I’m here. I’m on your team.” I love you more than words, and I’m looking forward to sharing the rest of our lives together.

Thank you to my children. This project has been a team effort, and each of you has made sacrifices in your own way for this to have worked. How many times have you heard over the last three years, “Once I finish the book…?” I thank you with everything I have for your support and for believing in me. My journey to attachment theory began with my unyielding desire to be the best mom I can be to each of you. I plan to create a legacy of emotional support for our family that will live on through the generations.

Jamie, for thirty years you’ve been the other rock in my life. I admire and value so many things about you. Your unwavering support brings tears to my eyes, and your solidness has kept me going in life in ways you will never know. And you do it all with impeccable style.

Thank you to my mom for believing in me beyond a shadow of a doubt. Thank you to my dad for giving in all the ways you knew how to give. You lived in the stars, too, and often I feel that my life is an extension of a journey you didn’t have the resources to complete on your own. Thank you to my grandma for modeling the combination of warmth and strength I aspire to, and thank you for all the laughs.

And for my team:

Thank you to Katrina, my work rock. You are very special to me. Thank you for your loyalty, and for tirelessly helping me make all of this logistically possible.

Alexandra Machinist, thank you for believing in me and in my work. I’m so grateful for all the inspiring skills you possess as a person and as a professional that set Secure Love into motion.

Stephanie Frerich, you are a gift. You’ve brought a purity to this project that has helped me stay true to the spirit of Secure Love, and I know that doesn’t always happen in the publishing world. I value your friendship and the raw insight you bring to my work. Thank you to everyone else at Simon & Schuster who has believed in and supported this project. I intend to make you proud to have taken me on.

Rachel Bertsche, you are a genius. I’m in awe at the speed at which you can digest information and help me turn it into something more approachable for readers. You helped me take Secure Love from a great book to a phenomenal one, and I’m beyond grateful to have you on my team for this book and beyond.

Thank you to Helen and the UK Penguin/Cornerstone team. Helen, I appreciate the feedback you’ve given me that has helped Secure Love maintain nonshaming inclusivity for all. Thank you for believing in this project.

And of course, where would this book be without my teachers?

John Bowlby, you created something beautiful… a theory of attachment that has the potential to change the course of humanity by moving us backward to go forward.

Sue Johnson, your brilliance is undeniable. I try to imagine the patience, intuition, and intelligence it took for you to sculpt EFT out of the deceptively simple theory of attachment. Your work has profoundly impacted my life personally and professionally and I thank you from the bottom of my heart for what you’ve tirelessly contributed to the field of psychology.

George Faller. You took the concept of EFT to new heights, and when I started learning from you everything changed. You brought a realness and grit to EFT that hasn’t taken away from the innate softness and empathy of our beloved modality, but has expanded it to something even more human and more relatable. By dedicating yourself to the exhausting task of traveling around the world and being our teacher, you are touching an unprecedented number of lives. Thank you, thank you, thank you. I feel proud to consider you a teacher, a mentor, and a friend.

Wendy, you are my EFT sister. Thank you for all the growth as therapists we’ve experienced together, for tolerating this book process even when it interrupted our weekly hikes, and for teaching me how to be a “strong Montana girl,” which is obviously still a work in progress.

Thank you to all the couples I’ve worked with. You have made it possible for me to bring this work to life and never could this book have been written without your willingness to trust me and take a journey through your vulnerability with me by your side. I have the utmost respect for anyone who is willing to be vulnerable and face the most painful parts of themselves, to commit the time, energy, and money to working on their relationship. This is not easy work, and each and every one of you is special to me. I never forget your stories.

Thank you to my Instagram followers, for whom this book was written. I never intended to grow such a large, loyal following, and I never intended to write a book. But consistently from day one of this journey you asked for it, and here it is for you, especially those of you with all the motivation in the world but with no access to couples therapy. I write for you.





More in Love and Romance





		 Why Men Love Bitches

		 He's Just Not That Into You





		 What Makes Love Last?

		 Four Things Women Want from a Man





		 Deal Breakers





About the Author




© OPAL AND OX PHOTOGRAPHY

JULIE MENANNO is a licensed marriage and family therapist with a passion for helping partners build deeper connections, lasting love, and secure attachments. She founded and runs Bozeman Therapy & Counseling and The Secure Relationship Coaching.

In addition to her therapeutic work, Julie shares her invaluable insights and advice with a wide audience through her popular Instagram account, @TheSecureRelationship. With over one million followers, she has become a trusted source for couples seeking guidance on fostering secure and fulfilling partnerships.

Julie resides in Bozeman, Montana, where she spends her free time hiking and skiing. She shares her life with her loving husband and six wonderful children, who remind her daily of the importance of nurturing and cultivating strong bonds.


SimonandSchuster.com

www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Julie-Menanno

@simonbooks





We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster ebook.

Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.



CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP



Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.





Notes





Chapter Two


50 percent of the time: Susan S. Woodhouse, Julie R. Scott, Allison D. Hepworth, and Jude Cassidy, “Secure Base Provision: A New Approach to Examining Links Between Maternal Caregiving and Infant Attachment,” Child Development (2019).

Alexander Thomas and Stella Chess: Alexander Thomas and Stella Chess, Temperament and Development (New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1977).

Good Inside, by Dr. Becky Kennedy: Becky Kennedy, Good Inside: A Guide to Becoming the Parent You Want to Be (New York: HarperCollins, 2022).

one foster mother to another: John Bowlby, “Forty-Four Juvenile Thieves: Their Characters and Home-Life,” International Journal of Psycho-Analysis (1944).

in order to seek food: John Bowlby, Attachment and Loss, vol. 1, Attachment (New York: Basic Books, 1982).

disorganized attachment: Mary Ainsworth, Patterns of Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation (New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1978).

attachment theory to adult relationships: Cindy Hazan and Phillip Shaver, “Romantic Love Conceptualized as an Attachment Process,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1987.

attachment behavioral system (ABS): Bowlby, Attachment.

attachment needs, longings, and fears: Ainsworth, Patterns of Attachment.

75/25 male/female: Rainer Weber, Lukas Eggenberger, Christoph Stosch, and Andreas Walther, “Gender Differences in Attachment Anxiety and Avoidance and Their Association with Psychotherapy Use: Examining Students from a German University,” Behavioral Sciences (2022).

75/25 female/male: Weber et al., “Gender Differences.”





Chapter Three


disorganized-oscillating: Joseph E. Beeney, Aiden G. C. Wright, Stephanie D. Stepp, Michael N. Hallquist, Sophie A. Lazarus, Julie R. S. Beeney, Lori N. Scott, and Paul A. Pilkonis, “Disorganized Attachment and Personality Functioning in Adults: A Latent Class Analysis,” Personality Disorders (July 2017).

the avoidant spectrum: Beeney et al., “Disorganized Attachment and Personality Functioning in Adults.”





Chapter Four


Hold Me Tight, by Dr. Sue Johnson: Sue Johnson, Hold Me Tight: Seven Conversations for a Lifetime of Love (New York: Little Brown Spark, 2008).





Chapter Ten


The Body Keeps the Score, by Dr. Bessel van der Kolk: Bessel van der Kolk, The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of Trauma (New York: Viking, 2014).





Chapter Eleven


the greatest overall relationship satisfaction: Bianca Acevedo and Arthur Aron, “Does a Long-Term Relationship Kill Romantic Love?,” Review of General Psychology (2009).

Mating in Captivity, by Esther Perel: Esther Perel, Mating in Captivity: Unlocking Erotic Intelligence (New York: Harper Collins, 2007).

Come As You Are, by Emily Nagoski: Emily Nagoski, Come As You Are: The Surprising New Science That Will Transform Your Sex Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2015).





Chapter Twelve


have seen marked improvement: Paul M. Spengler, Nick A. Lee, Stephanie A. Wiebe, and Andrea K. Wittenborn, “A Comprehensive Meta-Analysis on the Efficacy of Emotionally Focused Couple Therapy,” Couple and Family Psychology: Research and Practice (2022).





Index


A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your reading system’s search function.

abandonment and anxious attachment, 41

attachment needs and, 22

and attachment styles, 33–35

in childhood climate, 17–18

invalidation as, 208

in negative cycles, 78





ABS, see attachment behavioral system

abusive environments and relationships, ix, 34, 288

acceptance, 130–31, 222, 228, 244

achievement, 50

active listening, 162

addictions, 197, 210–12

affairs, 127, 195–97

aggression, 136

agreement need for, 158–59

problem-solving without, 165, 167–68

validation vs., 141, 142





Ainsworth, Mary, 21, 32

Alexander, Bruce, 210–11

“always,” saying, 160–61

ambivalence, 33, 41, 44–45, 196–97

anger anxiety over partner’s, 265–66

with anxious attachment, 45, 49–50

with avoidant attachment, 49–50, 53

as block to healing, 197

as caregiver response, 287

crying in, 145

denial of, 259–61

discussing issues with, 259–61, 265–66

feelings associated with, 289

in negative cycles, 84–85

strategies to manage, 292

validation of, 142, 155–56, 260–61





annoyance, 251–52

anxiety as caregiver response, 287

empathy and, 138

over partner’s anger, 265–66

powerlessness and, 44





anxiety disorder, 206

anxious-attached partner in anxious/anxious couples, 89–90

breaks in negative cycles for, 116–18

controlling for a response by, 157–58

empathy for, 138

minimizing feelings of, 291

negative cycle for, 76, 80–81, 294–96

problem-solving by, 166

sexual connection for, 216, 217

triggers for, 85–86

vulnerability for, 144

work on the relationship by, 43

see also anxious/avoidant couples





anxious attachment in adulthood, 42–47

in childhood, 39–42, 287

described, 33–34

disorganized-oscillating vs., 57–58

spectrum of, 37, 38





anxious/avoidant couples negative cycles for, 76–83, 87–91

sexual connection in, 216–19

Who’s the Bad Guy? trap for, 113–14

working on the relationship in, 239–41





apologies, 176, 184–85

appearance, focus on, 286

appeasement, 107, 135–36, 292

appreciation, 157, 262–63

approach/fear distress, 56

asexual individuals, 228

assertiveness, 136, 137, 164, 167

attachment behavioral system (ABS), 20, 27–28, 78, 83, 85

attachment blueprints, 38–39

attachment bonds, 4–5, 26 see also bonding cycles





attachment fears, 25–26, 75–76, 91–92

attachment figure, child as, 288

attachment-friendly environment(s) attachment intentions and lens in, 126–28

communicating in, 123–26

creating, 237, 238, 243–44

dealing with workable intruders in, 204–6, 209

defined, 96, 122

EVVICT-ing shame model for creating, 134–49

and four Fs in response to triggers, 135–37

healing injuries in, 188–89

rupture repair in, 173–77

self-regulation in, 134–35

sexual connection in, 221–24

shame and, 129–34

skills to cultivate, 122–23

success as establishing, 231, 232

voicing concerns in, 153–54

vulnerability exercise, 149–50





attachment injuries, 8, 186–98 day-to-day attachment ruptures vs., 186–87

healing, 187–98





attachment intentions, 126–28

attachment language, see language of attachment

attachment lens, xvi in hard conversations, 169, 224

on negative cycles, 122, 128

shame and, 130–31, 133–34





attachment needs, 21–26 articulating, 24–25, 27–28

attachment style and, 75–76

awareness of, xii–xiv, 221

consistent strategies for meeting, 56

deactivation of, 48, 49, 51

denying, 291

expressing, with vulnerability, 150

inconsistently met, 40–42

met, xiii–xv, 5, 25, 26

negative cycle and, 78–83

in repair process, 179, 181

taking ownership for, 152–53, 221

understanding your own, 23–24

universality of, xii, 4, 23, 32

unmet, xiii, xiv, 24–25, 78–83, 172 (see also attachment ruptures)





attachment ruptures, 7 attachment injuries vs., 186–87

defined, 25

identifying subtle, 171–73

and negative cycles, 80

unrepaired, 25, 82–83

see also repairing attachment ruptures





attachment style(s), 32–71 in adulthood, 42–47, 50–55, 57–59, 65–67

in casual relationships, 38–39, 69–70

categorization of, 21

changes in, 69–70

in childhood, 39–42, 48–50, 56–57, 62–64

compassion about, 36–37

described, 32–35

development of, 19

identifying your, 36–70

identifying your partner’s, 70–71

importance of understanding, 35

and negative cycles, 75–77

self-assessment questions, 47, 55, 59–60

in self relationship, 67–68

spectrum of, 37–38

strengths associated with, 61

see also specific styles





attachment theory, 14–21 attachment intentions and lens in, 126–28

in EFT, xvi

on emotional climate in childhood, 15–20

four Cs of attachment, 28–31

history of, 20–21

on relationships, xiii–xiv, xvi





attachment threats, 21, 26, 45, 83, 135–36, 180, 195

attraction, loss of, 224

authenticity, 122–23, 248

avoidant-attached partner in avoidant/avoidant couples, 89, 90

breaks in negative cycles for, 116–19

empathy for, 138–39

negative cycle for, 76, 80–81, 237, 290–93

sexual connection for, 216, 217

work on the relationship by, 51–52

see also anxious/avoidant couples





avoidant attachment in adulthood, 50–55

in childhood, 48–50, 285–86

described, 33

disorganized-impoverished attachment vs., 59

spectrum of, 37, 38

strengths of, 61





awareness, 277–78



bad feelings, 268

baggage, relationship, 5

balance, emotional, 88–89, 216

bargaining, 219–20

behavioral change acceptance and, 130–31

in attachment-friendly environments, 173

attempting to force, 235–37

commitments to, 176

modeling, 237–39, 241

in negative cycles, 92–93

pushback to, 249

to repair ruptures, 184–85

for stress reduction, 203

top-down and bottom-up, 11–12





betrayal, 187, 188, 190, 198

Beyond Addiction (Foote), 212

“big” emotional expression for anxious-attached partner, 41–42, 294

for avoidant-attached partner, 49–50

in childhood, 17–18

triggering event and, 84–85





bipolar disorder, 206

black-and-white thinking, 166

blame for anxious-attached partner, 294

for avoidant-attached partner, 52

childhood attachment and, 39, 40

counterblaming, 90, 162, 253, 292

loving listening vs., 162–63

in negative cycles, 77, 113–14, 236

and sexual connection, 223

shame and, 132





Body Keeps Score, The (van der Kolk), 210

body scanning, 110, 118

bonding cycles, 93–94, 106, 193

bonds, attachment, 4–5, 26

borderline personality disorder, 206

bottom-up approach to change, 11

boundary setting, 4 for disorganized-attached adult, 58–59

language for, 252–53, 263, 266–68

sexual, 227–28





Bowlby, John, 20, 21, 27, 32

box breathing, 112

breaks, 115–19, 137, 295

breathing exercises, 112, 203



calming, 106–7

casual relationships, 38–39, 69–70

Chess, Stella, 18–19

childhood attachment relationships, xvii, 10 anxious, 39–42, 287

and attachment style in adulthood, 32

attachment theory on, 20–21

avoidant, 48–50, 285–86

bonds in, 5

disorganized, 56–57, 288

and overall emotional climate, 15–20

physical connection in, 214–15

and relationships in adulthood, 14–15

secure, 62–64

shame in, 129–30





children, relationship with your, 38–39

clarity, 233, 245–46, 271

climate, emotional, see emotional climate

clinginess, 295

closeness inconsistency in, 287

need for, xii–xiii, 22–23, 54–55, 91

pushing away, 293





codependency, 26

Come As You Are (Nagoski), 228

comfort in four Cs, 28–29, 62

seeking, 106, 291

touch for, 214–15





commitment, 201

communication in attachment-friendly environment, 123–26

negative cycles of (see negative cycles)

nonverbal, 191, 248–49

for rupture repair, 176–77

in secure relationships, 10–13

and sexual connection, 226–29

underlying problems with, 1–4, 28

with vulnerability, 94

of your perspective, 165–66





compartmentalization, 61, 225

compassion, 37, 70–71, 137–38, 147, 190

complex post-traumatic stress disorder (CPTSD), 207

Complex PTSD (Walker), 135–36

concern(s) criticism vs. expressing, 153–54

interpretation of, as criticism, 270–71

language of attachment for raising, 154–55

listening to partner’s, 161–63





confidence, 164–65

conflict after work on the relationship, 230–31

avoiding, 52, 291

chronic childhood, 288

communication problems underlying, 1–4, 28

empathy during, 139

escalating, 1–3, 5–6, 53–54, 119–20, 256–57

in four Cs, 29, 31, 62

insecure attachment at root of, 4–8

listening during, 162–63

negative cycles and, 76, 77, 86–87, 91–93

in secure relationships, 9

shutting down during, 293

stealth vs. obvious, 123–25

unresolved, 3, 11

see also attachment ruptures





connection addiction and, 211

avoidant attachment and, 53–55

building, 245

for co-regulation, 106–7

curiosity and, 147

depression and, 205

fighting/making up for, 93

in four Cs, 29–30, 62

influence and, 145–46

listening and, 162–63

with other people, 282

physical, 30, 191, 214–16, 248–49

rejection and, 264

secure attachment and, 65

shame and, 132, 134

see also sexual connection





conscious memories, 48

control for anxious-attached partners, 294

attempting to control your partner, 44, 123

controlling for a response, 157–58

influence vs., 145–46

resistance to being controlled, 238

in secure relationships, 65

in work on the relationship, 240–41





convincing others, 167–68

cooperation, 31, 62

co-regulation attachment-friendly language for, 261, 271, 272

during excessive stress, 203

in negative cycles, 106–9

taking a break for, 115–16





counterblaming, 90, 162, 253, 292

couples therapy, xvi–xvii, 234, 239–40, 245–46 see also Emotionally Focused Couples Therapy (EFT)





CPTSD (complex post-traumatic stress disorder), 207

criticism, 253 from anxious-attached partner, 294

concern and, 153–54, 270–71

defensiveness over, 256–57

shame and, 132





crying, 144–45

curiosity, 146–48, 255–56, 259



deal-breakers, 7–8

DEAR MAN technique, 254–55

defensiveness and attachment-friendly environments, 122

for avoidant-attached partner, 291

as fight response, 136–37

negative cycle and, 236–37

over criticism, 256–57

of partner, 71

protesting and, 250

shame and, 132

taking a break to reduce, 119





deflection, 78, 102, 292

demon dialogue, 76

denial, 259–61, 291

dependency, 59

depression, 70, 204–6

details, 159–60, 295

disagreements, 7–8, 255–56

disappointment, 225, 263

discomfort with change, 243

getting comfortable with, 221–23

reducing, 275–76

with vulnerability, 104





disconnection, 33–35, 82, 258–59

disengagement (shutting down), 53 for avoidant-attached partner, 11, 49, 293

as flight response, 137

persistent, 3

talking about desire for, 257–58





disorganized-attached partner controlling for a response by, 157–58

negative cycle for, 76, 77

triggers for, 85–86





disorganized attachment in adulthood, 57–59

in childhood, 56–57, 288

described, 34–35

spectrum of, 38





disorganized-impoverished attachment, 59, 60

disorganized-oscillating attachment, 57–60

dissociation, 56, 59, 226, 288

distancing by avoidant-attached partner, 101, 291, 293

in reaction to pressure, 235, 237–38

and sexual connection, 225

when working on the relationship, 278–79





domestic violence, 288

dry spells, sexual, 228

dysregulation, 287



earned secure attachment, 37

EFT, see Emotionally Focused Couples Therapy

emotional balance, 88–89, 216

emotional climate changing, 11–12, 195–96

childhood, 15–20, 62, 288

injuries and, 195–96

overall, 15–20

ruptures and, 7, 171–73

in secure relationships, 25

and sexual connection, 213–14





emotional disengagement, see disengagement

emotional energy, in relationships, 231–32

emotional engagement, 118, 202

emotional expression “big” (see “big” emotional expression)

vulnerability vs., 144–45





Emotionally Focused Couples Therapy (EFT), xvi–xvii, 12, 21, 103, 234

emotionally-intrusive caregivers, 49, 286

emotional needs, minimizing others’, 50–51

emotional pain, 24, 27–28 avoidant attachment and, 50

changing subject to manage, 193

denying, 290

disorganized attachment and, 58

facing, 158

hurtful comments to inflict, 293

justifying behavior with, 177

with secure attachment, 62–64

of sexual rejection, 223–25

with trigger, 83–85

vulnerability as exposure to, 102–3

and Who Gets to Hurt Worse? trap, 114





emotional presence, 139, 202–4, 208, 287

emotional trauma, 207

emotional validation, 137 of anger, 142, 155–56, 260–61

anxious attachment and, 41–42, 46

in attachment-friendly environments, 122

attachment-friendly language for, 272

for co-regulation, 107

in EVVICT shame model, 139–43

in family of origin, 14–15

in hard conversations, 155–56

modeling, 238–39

need for, xii–xiii

in problem-solving, 167

in reparative conversations, 176, 190, 191, 194

seeking, 261–62

self-validation, 110–11, 239, 282

and sexual connection, 222, 224

trauma related to lack of, 208





emotional weather, 25

empathy in attachment-friendly environments, 64, 122

and connection, 30

in EVVICT shame model, 137–39

as goal, 174–75

with protective stances, 11

in reparative conversations, 190, 191, 194





enemy lens, 128

energy, emotional, 231–32

engagement, emotional, 118, 202

engulfed, fear of being, 54–55

enmeshment, 88

evolution, attachment and, 20–21

EVVICT-ing shame model, 134–49

excessive stress, 66–67, 202–4

excuses, making, 192–93

expectations, realistic, 68

experiences, sharing after working on the relationship, 281–82

with attachment-friendly language, 247–49

in reparative conversations, 189–90

when dealing with depression, 205

for wounding partner, 194–95





extended family members, 38–39

externalization, 112–15



failure fear of, 50, 52–53

in working on the relationship, 234–35, 241–46





Faller, George, 84, 155, 229, 299

family of origin, 14–15

fawn response, 135–37

fear-based communication, 45

fear(s) approach/fear distress, 56

of being engulfed, 54–55

of child, 288

of failure, 50, 52–53

feelings associated with, 289





feelings attachment-friendly language on, 273

discouraging children from discussing, 285

experiencing, 268

as indicators of rupture, 172–73

“irrational,” 111

in relationships, 289

in reparative conversations, 180

with secure attachment, 275–76

sharing, 281–82

stuffing down, 16, 50, 261, 290

of wounding partner, 194–95





felt sense (felt experience) of attachment rupture, 7

defined, xiii

of insecure attachment, xv

of met needs, 26

of secure attachment, xiv–xv, 8–10, 63, 276

of trigger, 83–85





fight response, 135, 136

filtering for the negative, 45, 294

“fine,” saying you are, 259–61, 290

fix it approach, 285, 293

flexibility, problem-solving, 166

flight response, 135, 137

food, 25–26, 40, 235–38

Foote, Jeffrey, 212

Foreplay Sex Radio, 229

forgiveness, 194, 197

four Cs of attachment, 28–31, 62, 80, 217–18

four Fs in response to triggers, 135–37, 181

Frankl, Viktor, 97

freeze response, 135, 137

friendships, 38–39, 69

fun, 30, 219–20, 280, 281



gifts, giving, 163

good-enough relationships, 62, 284

Good Inside (Kennedy), 19

goodness of fit, temperament, 18–19

grounding, 110, 111, 135, 139, 203

grumpiness, 128, 265–66

guilt, 131



happiness, 213–14

hard conversations, 151–69 “always” and “never” in, 160–61

attachment-friendly language in, 154–55, 253–55

attempting to control partner in, 157–58

avoiding, 293

bigger meaning and details in, 159–60

concerns vs. criticism in, 153–54

growth after, 232

for healing injuries, 189–94

leading with appreciation in, 157

listening during, 161–63

need to agree in, 158–59

negative cycles in, 77, 80

problem-solving in, 163–69

reaching and responding in, 151–52

self-focus in, 152–53

setbacks in, 171

about sexual connection, 220–23

validation in, 155–56





Hazan, Cindy, 21

healing attachment injuries baseline criteria for, 187–89

blocks to, 195–98

conversations for, 189–94

relationship after, 198

for wounding partner, 194–95





healthy relationships, xi, xiv, 96, 227–29

help, asking for, 250–51

Hold Me Tight (Johnson), 76

hope, 84–85, 102

hostile environment, 288

hunger, xiii, 27



ICEEFT.com, 21, 234

ignored, being, 103–4, 285

incompatibility, 3–4, 8, 169, 245

independence, 252–53, 286, 292

influence, in EVVICT shame model, 145–46

injuries, attachment, see attachment injuries

insecure attachment attachment lens for behavior related to, 169

conflict, negative cycles, and, 76, 77, 86–87

depression and, 205

described, 33–34

development of, 19, 39

felt sense of, xv

flexibility and, 166

prevalence of, xv, 35

relationships between people with, xv–xvi, 46–47, 80

at root of conflict, 4–8

spectrum for, 37–38

strengths associated with, 61

unmet needs and, 24, 25

see also specific types





insecurities, sexual, 222–23

intentions, 126–28, 176

interdependence, 54–55

intimacy, 53, 222

I-statements, 4, 152



Johnson, Sue, xvi, 21, 76, 299

journaling, 118–19

joy, 193



Kennedy, Becky, 19

Kolakowski, Shannon, 206



language of attachment for addressing denied anger, 259–61

for addressing partner’s sadness, 268

about anger-related issues, 259–61, 265–66

for annoyance over important topics, 251–52

about anxiety over partner’s anger, 265–66

for bringing up desire to work on the relationship, 268–70

for bringing up difficult topics, 253–55

about concern interpreted as criticism, 270–71

about defensiveness over criticism, 256–57

for disagreeing with your partner, 255–56

about disappointment, 263

about doing things your own way, 252–53

examples of, 247–73

about feeling emotionally shut out, 258–59

about feeling misunderstood, 271

about feeling overwhelmed/needing help, 250–51

in hard conversations, 154–55

about loneliness, 249–50

about reactive response from partner, 272–73

to request breaks in negative cycles, 117

for seeking appreciation, 262–63

for seeking emotional validation, 261–62

for seeking reassurance, 264

for setting boundaries, 252–53, 266–68

to share experiences, 247–49

about wanting to disengage/shut down, 257–58





lashing out, 103–4, 207

letting it go, 82–83, 148–49, 252

Linehan, Marsha, 254

listening, 161–63, 165, 190, 194, 282

loneliness, 203–4, 249–50

lovable, need to be viewed as, 22, 40, 41

love listening with, 161–63, 190, 194

from partner and self-love, 26

secure, xviii, 8–10, 201–2, 222





Malkin, Craig, 206

manipulation, 142–43

maternal deprivation, 20

Mating in Captivity (Perel), 225

meaning, 159–60, 179, 187, 194

meanness, 266–68

medical problems, sex and, 214

mental illness, 206 see also depression





mentalization, 109

me-versus-you approach, 251–52

mindfulness, 110

minimization, 50–51, 190, 290, 291

“Miss, The” trap, 114–15

mistakes, shame over, 286

misunderstood, feeling, 271

mood swings, 58

“moving target” approach, 293

mutual respect, 167–68



Nagoski, Emily, 228

name-calling, 266–68

narcissistic personality disorder, 206

National Domestic Violence Hotline, ix

needs, attachment, see attachment needs

negative cycles, xvii acknowledging the problem in, 97–101

with anxious-attached partner, 294–96

for anxious/avoidant couples, 76–83, 87–91

assessing security in, 276–77, 279–80

attachment lens for viewing, 128

and attachment styles, 46, 75–77

with avoidant-attached partner, 290–93

avoiding, 8, 81–83

baseline, 278

and bonding cycles, 93–94

defined, 76

EVVICTing shame in, 139, 143, 147

four Fs response in, 136–37

getting vulnerable in, 101–6

healing injuries outside of, 190, 191

identifying, 97–101

interrupting, 95–120

naming, 112–15

preventing, 96, 121 (see also attachment-friendly environments)

as real enemy in conflict, 91–93

reassurance in, 119–20

related to sexual connection, 220–21

repairing after (see repairing attachment ruptures)

self-regulation and co-regulation in, 106–12

setbacks related to, 171

sexual connection and, 214, 216, 218–21

subtle, 171–72

taking breaks in, 115–19

triggering events for, 83–86

unmet attachment needs and, 78–83

unrepaired, 86–87

working on the relationship as, 235–41





nervous system attachment needs and, xiii, 22, 24–25

discomfort with change in, 243

with disorganized attachment, 56, 58

physical connection and, 30





“never,” saying, 160–61

nonverbal communication, 191, 248–49



“one foot out the door” approach, 296

openness, 194, 222

open relationships, 228

organized attachment styles, 56

other-focused approach, 43–44, 152–53

overreacting, 131–32, 135, 287

overwhelmed, feeling, 224, 250–51, 287



pain, see emotional pain

parental attunement, 17–18

parent–child relationships attachment styles in, 39–42, 48–50, 56–57, 62–64

physical connection in, 215

parents, sexual connection for, 225





partner(s) with addiction, 211–12

addressing anger of, 259–61, 265–66

addressing sadness of, 268

attachment style of, 70–71

attempting to change your, 71, 123

concern interpreted as criticism by, 270–71

controlling responsiveness of, 157–58

curiosity for, 146–48

with depression, 205–6

differing growth rates of, 231–32

excessive stress for, 204

listening to, 161–63, 165

naming negative cycle with, 112

overfocusing on, 296

reactive response from, 272–73

responding to, in repair process, 183–84

self-regulation by, 108–9

working on relationship to change, 235–41

wounded, 187, 189–90, 197

wounding, 187–90, 192–95

see also anxious-attached partner; avoidant-attached partner





people-pleasing, 42, 165, 296

“peppering with questions,” 147, 294

Perel, Esther, 225

perfection, 9–10, 148, 231, 244, 277, 283–84

personality disorders, 206

physical abuse, 226

physical connection, 30, 191, 214–16, 248–49

physical presence, of caregivers, 287

physical trauma, 208

physiological sensations, in repair exercise, 179

poking behavior, 296

polyamorous couples, 228

positive behaviors, 127–28

positive feelings, 276, 289

post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 208

predatory behavior, 288

presence emotional, 139, 202–4, 208, 287

physical, 287





problem(s) acknowledging, 97–101

recognizing your own part in, 296

underlying, 1–4, 159–60

without solutions, 168–69





problem-solving, 64 in hard conversations, 163–69

in negative cycle, 290

and negative cycles, 83

security based on, 279–80





professional help, 169 for dealing with depression, 205, 206

with healing injuries, 197–98

resistance to, 239–40

with sexual connection, 221, 226, 229

with unresolved trauma, 208–9

for working on the relationship, 233–34





proof, presenting, 295

protective stances and feelings, 6, 180

protests of anxious-attached partner, 33, 90, 294

attachment ruptures related to, 100, 101

critical, 253

defensiveness and, 250

with insecure attachment, 6

in negative cycles, 78, 80–81, 86

and rupture repair, 175

through lens of attachment, 129





PTSD (post-traumatic stress disorder), 208

punitive environment, 288

pursue-withdraw dynamic, 217–21, 223–25, 227

pushback, 249



“raising the bar,” 295

Rat Park study, 210–11

reaching and responding, 90–92, 151–52

reactive responses dealing with partner’s, 272–73

minimizing shame and, 133–34

in negative cycles, 84

self-regulation to overcome, 134–35

vulnerability and, 79–80, 103–4, 149–50





reason, excessive use of, 49–51, 292

reassurance anxious attachment and, 41, 42, 45–46

attachment-friendly language for, 264, 265

in negative cycles, 119–20

during sex, 227





reframing relationship, 12

rejection attachment needs and, 22

childhood, 288

in childhood emotional climate, 15–16

and connection, 264

sexual, 223–25





relationship baggage, 5

relationship needs, see attachment needs

relationship(s) and addiction, 210, 211

after healing injuries, 198

attachment styles in, 69–70

attachment theory on, xiii–xiv, xvi

casual, 38–39, 69–70

common feelings in, 289

emotional balance in, 88–89

emotional energy in, 231–32

ending, 7–8, 169, 198, 245–46

enjoying, 280

good-enough, 62, 284

healthy, xi, xiv, 96, 227–29

imbalances in, 238

longevity of, 89–90

nurturing, 283

protecting, 283

reframing, 12

repeated interactions in, 123

self-, xiv, 67–68, 103, 232–33, 243

self-growth and improving, 12

sexual stalemate in, 219–20

see also working on the relationship





relationship satisfaction, 9–10, 213–14, 227–28, 232–33

repairing attachment injuries, see healing attachment injuries

repairing attachment ruptures, 170–85 after negative cycles, 170–71

apologies/behavior change and, 184–85

assessing security based on, 279

creating space for, 174–75

emotional climate and, 25

environment for, 173–77

examples, 181–84

negative cycles and, 87

and nurturing relationship, 283

problem-solving after, 163–64

process for, 177–81

rushing process, 193–94

success as, 231

and unrepaired negative cycles, 86–87





re-parenting, 67–68

repetition, 166, 295

resentment, 164, 219–20, 224

resilience, 7, 30, 122, 280

respect, mutual, 167–68

responsiveness, 63, 104, 157–58, 294

right, getting it, 6, 46, 52, 130–31, 290

rigidity, 132

romantic relationships anxious attachment style in, 42–47

attachment bonds in, 5, 26

attachment styles in, 42–47, 50–55, 57–59, 65–67

avoidant attachment style in, 50–55

disorganized attachment style in, 57–59

secure attachment style in, 65–67





rose-colored glasses, 244, 290

ruptures, attachment, see attachment ruptures



sadness, 268, 289

safety attachment-friendly language to create, 249

as attachment intention, 126, 127

for disorganized-attached child, 56

emotional validation for, 155

in family of origin, 15

felt sense of, 195

for healing attachment injuries, 188–89

minimizing shame with, 133

need for, xii, 22, 26, 49

and negative cycles, 83

unresolved trauma and, 208, 209





satisfaction, relationship, 9–10, 213–14, 227–28, 232–33

secure attachment in adulthood, 65–67

assessing level of, 275–80

attachment needs and, 22

in childhood, 62–64

described, 32

earned, 37

feelings with, 275–76

felt sense of, xiv–xv, 8–10, 63, 276

parental attunement for, 17–18





secure love, xviii, 8–10, 201–2, 222

Secure Relationship, The (Instagram account), xvii–xviii

secure relationships, xv activities in, 280–83

being imperfect in, 283–84

caring for, 122

creating, 10–13, 70

felt experience in, 8–10

hard conversations in, 80

identifying, xi–xii

managing negative cycles in, 82

and resilience, 7

secure/secure couples, 89

with self, 66, 232–33, 243

spectrum of, xv





self, sense of, 43–44, 64

self-awareness, 97–101, 108, 110

self-care, xiv, 68, 118, 206, 225

self-engagement, 118

self-focused approach, 152–53

self-growth, 12, 231–33, 242–45 childhood messages encouraging, 130

defining success as, 277–78

pursuing, 123, 242–45

recognizing, 244–45





self-judgment, 146, 147

self-regulation with anxious attachment, 46

in attachment-friendly environments, 134–35

during breaks in negative cycles, 118

for co-regulation, 108–9

with disorganized attachment, 61

before hard conversations, 248

in problem-solving, 165

with secure attachment, 63, 202

in Somatic Experiencing therapy, 209

strategies for, 109–12





self-relationship, xiv, 66–68, 103, 232–33, 243

self-validation, 110–11, 239, 282

sensitivity, 193, 270–71, 291

sex addiction, 197, 210

sexual connection, 30, 213–29 in anxious/avoidant couples, 216–19

healthy, 227–29

importance of physical connection, 214–16

negative cycles related to, 220–21

and pain of rejection, 223–25

relationship satisfaction and, 213–14, 227–28

and sexual stalemate, 219–20

trauma related to, 226–27

uncomfortable conversations about, 221–23





sexual stalemate, 219–20

sexual trauma, 208

shame, 162–63 asking for reassurance to defuse, 119–20

and attachment-friendly environments, 129–34

avoidant attachment and, 49–50, 285, 286

EVVICT-ing shame model, 134–49

feelings associated with, 289

in rupture repair, 175–76, 180

self-validation to overcome, 110, 111

about sex, 222, 225, 226

and unresolved trauma, 207–8





shame spiraling, 192

Shaver, Phillip, 21

shut out, feeling, 145–46, 258–59

shutting down, see disengagement

silent treatment, 76, 91, 183, 263, 295

skepticism, 50–51

solutions, problems without, 168–69

Somatic Experiencing therapy, 61, 209

soothing, 214–15

space, creating, 174–75, 193–94, 242–43, 263

status quo, maintaining, 241–42

stonewalling, 76, 122, 293

strength, 61, 198

stress, excessive, 66–67, 202–4

subject, changing the, 193

substance abuse problems, 197, 210

success childhood focus on, 286

defining, 231–32, 277





support, 22, 29, 118, 204, 282



talk therapy, 209

tantrums, 42, 266–68

temperament, 18–19

testing behaviors, 46, 294

therapy aversion/resistance to, 51–52, 268–70

rupture repair in, 173–77

triggering unresolved trauma in, 208





Thomas, Alexander, 18–19

threats, attachment, see attachment threats

time frame, for resolution, 169, 189, 193–94

time spent together, 249–50

tolerance, 148–49

top-down approach to change, 11

trauma disorganized attachment and, 34, 57, 59

emotional, 207

meaning of, 187

physical, 208

sexual, 226–27

unresolved, 206–10, 288





traumahealing.org, 61, 209

triggering events (triggers) attachment theory on, 20

for disorganized-attached partner, 58–59

EVVICTing shame in response to, 143–44, 146–47

four Fs in response to, 135–37

in hard conversations, 162

identifying, 97–101, 112

managing, 124–26

of negative cycles, 83–86

in repair exercise, 178–84

self-regulation to manage, 135





trust, 58, 157, 186–87, 191, 195



understanding, 140, 141, 146–47, 155, 176

unpredictability, 287



van der Kolk, Bessel, 210

vulnerability attachment-friendly language about, 257, 258

in bonding cycles, 93–94

choosing, 284

communicating with, 10–11, 30, 94

in EVVICT shame model, 143–45

in negative cycles, 101–6

and reactive responses, 79–80

in reparative conversations, 180

secure attachment and, 65

in sexual connection, 215–16, 221, 222

showing, 149–50

validation of, 141–42





Walker, Pete, 135–36

“walking on eggshells,” 193, 249, 265–66

Watson, Laurie, 229

weather, emotional, 25

When Depression Hurts Your Relationship (Kolakowski and Malkin), 206

“Who Gets to Hurt Worse?” trap, 114

“Who’s the Bad Guy?” trap, 113–14

withdrawal, 132

workable intruders, 201–12 addictions, 210–12

and criteria for secure love, 201–2

depression, 204–6

excessive stress, 202–4

mental illness, 206

unresolved trauma, 206–10





working on the relationship by anxious-attached partner, 43

by avoidant-attached partner, 51–52

conflict after, 230–31

defining success for, 231–32

initiating conversation about, 268–70

maintaining status quo after, 241–42

moving forward after failed attempts at, 234–35, 241–46

as negative cycle, 235–41

parting ways after, 245–46

pursuing self-growth and, 242–45

seeking professional help for, 233–34

self-care as, 68

self-growth from, 12, 71, 231–33





work relationships, 38–39, 69

worthy, need to be viewed as, 22

wounded partner, 187, 189–90, 197

wounding partner, 187–90, 192–95



yelling, 266–68





1230 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10020

www.SimonandSchuster.com

Copyright © 2024 by Julie Menanno

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information, address Simon & Schuster Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.

First Simon & Schuster hardcover edition January 2024

SIMON & SCHUSTER and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

Simon & Schuster: Celebrating 100 Years of Publishing in 2024

For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.

The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.

Interior design by Joy O’Meara

Art by NataliaMalikova@Dreamstime.com

Jacket illustration by Emma Shoshanna Shaw

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.

ISBN 978-1-6680-1286-4

ISBN 978-1-6680-1288-8 (ebook)


Praise for The Mind Club

			“According to psychologists Wegner and Gray, ‘you can never be certain that other minds even exist.’ The authors explore these uncertainties, weaving together personal anecdotes and research on human behavior and perception to try to unravel the mysteries of the mind.”

			—Scientific American

			“Daniel Wegner was among the world’s cleverest, wittiest, and most beloved social psychologists. The Mind Club is genuinely novel, with brilliantly conceived studies on some of the deepest issues the mind of man can ponder.”

			—Steven Pinker, author of The Stuff of Thought and How the Mind Works

			“A layman’s guide to understanding . . . where and why people draw the line between perceiving another (or an inanimate object) as having a mind or not.”

			—Vox

			“One of psychology’s greatest and one of its best young minds—who better to remind us to mind minds.”

			—Michael Norton, Harvard Business School professor and coauthor of Happy Money: The Science of Happier Spending

			“When it comes to morality—abortion, animal rights, legal culpability—many of the deepest questions boil down to: Does he or she (or even it) have a properly working mind? In lucid prose, Wegner and Gray explore the profound nature and implications of this question—one that is becoming all the more complex as lines of awareness and intent blur in a world where technology is rapidly advancing.”

			—David DeSteno, author of Out of Character

			“The world lost an intellectual giant when Daniel Wegner passed. Lucky for us, his legendary wit and conversation-stoking discoveries live on in The Mind Club, and indeed in the career and voice of Kurt Gray, one of Daniel’s last doctoral students.”

			—Barbara Fredrickson, author of Positivity and Love 2.0

			“Science writing at its best: informative, entertaining, and thought-­provoking.”

			—Lisa Feldman Barrett, author of How Emotions Are Made





PENGUIN BOOKS

			THE MIND CLUB

			Daniel M. Wegner was the John Lindsley Professor of Psychology in Memory of William James at Harvard University and the recipient of the 2011 Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award of the American Psychological Association, the 2011 William James Fellow Award of the Association for Psychological Science, and the 2011 Distinguished Scientist Award from the Society of Experimental Social Psychology. He is the author of The Illusion of Conscious Will, among other books. He passed away in 2013.

			Kurt Gray is an assistant professor of psychology at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, where he leads the Mind Perception and Morality Lab. He received his BS from the University of Waterloo and his PhD in social psychology from Harvard University. A recipient of the Janet Taylor Spence Award for Transformative Early Career Research from the Association for Psychological Science, he lives in Carrboro, North Carolina.

			www.kurtjgray.com

			@kurtjgray





		 			PENGUIN BOOKS

			An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC

			375 Hudson Street

			New York, New York 10014

			penguin.com

			First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin, an imprint of Penguin Random House LLC, 2016

			Published in Penguin Books 2017

			Copyright © 2016 by The Estate of Daniel M. Wegner and Kurt Gray

			Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.

			THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGED THE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS:

			Names: Wegner, Daniel M., 1948– author. | Gray, Kurt James, author.

			Title: The mind club : who thinks, what feels, and why it matters / Daniel M. Wegner and Kurt Gray.

			Description: New York, NY : Viking, [2016] | Description based on print version record and CIP data provided by publisher; resource not viewed.

			Identifiers: LCCN 2016004465 (print) | LCCN 2015048169 (ebook) |

			ISBN 9781101606421 (ebook) | ISBN 9780670785834 (hc.) | ISBN 9780143110026 (pbk.) Subjects: LCSH: Psychology. | Cognitive psychology. | Psychology,

			Comparative. | BISAC: PSYCHOLOGY / Cognitive Psychology. | PSYCHOLOGY / Interpersonal Relations. | PHILOSOPHY / Mind & Body.

			Classification: LCC BF121 (print) | LCC BF121 .W36 2016 (ebook) | DDC 150—dc23

			LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015048169

			Cover design: Paul Buckley

			Cover illustration: Nicholas Blechman





		Version_3





Contents


			Praise for The Mind Club

			About the Authors

			Title Page

			Copyright

			Preface

			Chapter 1: WELCOME TO THE CLUB

			Chapter 2: THE ANIMAL

			Chapter 3: THE MACHINE

			Chapter 4: THE PATIENT

			Chapter 5: THE ENEMY

			Chapter 6: THE SILENT

			Chapter 7: THE GROUP

			Chapter 8: THE DEAD

			Chapter 9: GOD

			Chapter 10: THE SELF


Acknowledgments

			Notes

			Index





Preface



In Jorge Luis Borges’s short story “The Secret Miracle,” a writer is unjustly imprisoned by the Nazis and sentenced to death. On the eve of his execution, he prays to God, asking for a year to finish his play. That night he dreams that his prayer is answered, but the next morning he is nevertheless led down to the firing squad in gloomy rain. As he stands in front of four soldiers, “a heavy drop of rain graze[s] [his] temple and roll[s] slowly down his cheek; the sergeant call[s] out the final order.”

			But suddenly, miraculously, the universe stops:


The weapons converged upon [him], but the men who were to kill him were immobile. The sergeant’s arm seemed to freeze, eternal, in an inconclusive gesture. . . . As though in a painting, the wind had died. [He] attempted a scream, a syllable, the twisting of a hand. He realized that he was paralyzed. He could hear not the slightest murmur of the halted word. He thought . . . time has halted. . . .

			He had asked God for an entire year in which to finish his work; God in His omnipotence had granted him a year. God had performed for him a secret miracle: the German bullet would kill him, at the determined hour, but in [his] mind a year would pass between the order to fire and the discharge of the rifles.

			In this secret year the writer crafts his play into perfection. Without the aid of movement, or speech, or writing, he repeats the acts in his head, honing every paragraph and polishing every word. At long last “[h]e complete[s] his play; only a single epithet [is] left to be decided upon now. He [finds] it; the drop of water roll[s] down his cheek. He [begins] a maddening cry, he [shakes] his head, and the fourfold volley fell[s] him.”

			In 2010 Dan Wegner was diagnosed with ALS. This degenerative disease slowly destroyed his ability to walk, to stand, to move, to talk, to eat, and—eventually—to breathe. Before his diagnosis, Dan had conceived of this book in his mind, but—like Borges’s prisoner—had only just begun writing it. Recognizing the inexorable march of his disease, Dan asked me to join him and help transform the ideas into words. It is my hope that his wisdom and wit shine through in these chapters; if they do not, the fault is mine alone.

			My miracle, it is no secret, was having Dan as my graduate adviser. This book is dedicated to his creativity and unique perspective, to his witty one-liners, his collection of robots, and his ability to render clear the mysteries of human experience. May we always perceive his mind.

			—KG





Chapter 1


			WELCOME TO THE CLUB





Nothing seems more real than the minds of others. Every day, you consider what your boss might be thinking, whether your spouse is happy, and what that shady crew of teenagers wants. The apparent reality of other minds is so powerful that you’ve likely never stopped to ask whether they actually exist. But there is a very real possibility that everyone you know could be mindless zombies.

			Even your mother could be a zombie. She may not shuffle, groan, or eat brains, but she could still be a philosophical zombie—someone who acts and speaks normally but who lacks conscious experiences. Your life may be filled with rich mental experiences, but your mother’s could be completely empty. Instead of a bustling city of thought and emotion, Mom’s mental life might be like a Hollywood set, with only the appearance of reality. When you hug each other, you might feel warm and safe, but her brain might only robotically register the pressure of your arms. Now, you might think, “No, not my mother!” but how could you prove otherwise? Even sophisticated brain scans can’t reveal what it’s like to be another person.

			That your mother might be a fleshy automaton stems from the philosophical “problem of other minds.”1 Because we can never directly experience the inside of other minds, many questions about them are fundamentally unanswerable. Do strawberries taste the same to you as to someone else? Is your blue the same as someone else’s blue? Perhaps when you look at the sky, you see what someone else would call yellow. If you’re a man, then you can never know what it feels like to give birth. If you’re a woman, then you can never know what it feels like to be kicked in the goolies.

			More fundamental than the uncertainty of other people’s specific experiences, you can never be certain that other minds even exist. You might be the only mind in the whole world, the sole sentient being in a crowd of mindless drones or the lone true thinker within a computer-generated matrix.

			The uncertainty of other minds has fueled centuries of philosophizing and also lies at the heart of some of the most interesting—and most terrible—human behavior. As we will see, it can explain how the Nazis could murder six million Jews, why animals are sometimes tortured for sport, and why people debate the existence of God so intensely. The mysterious nature of other minds can also help to explain the behavior of one British man named Dennis Nilsen.

			Dennis Nilsen was born in 1945 in a seaside town in Scotland. After a brief stint in the army, he moved to London, where he worked first as a police officer and then as a civil servant. Despite his good job, Nilsen felt unfulfilled and isolated; he seldom spoke to his family, had few friends, and had difficulty maintaining close relationships. He also had dark fantasies about sexually dominating young men, whom he liked to imagine as completely passive or even unconscious. After the dissolution of one relationship, Nilsen began luring young men into his apartment with the promise of food, alcohol, and lodging. Once they were asleep, Nilsen would strangle them into unconsciousness before drowning and dismembering them in the bathtub. He managed to murder fifteen people before being discovered and sentenced to prison for life.

			Strikingly, although Nilsen was a ruthless murderer of other people, he had the deepest affection for his dog, a mutt named Bleep. Following his arrest, Nilsen’s biggest concern was not about the families of those men he killed, or even about himself, but about his furry companion—would she be traumatized by his arrest? How could Nilsen be indifferent to the pain of those he murdered and yet be overwhelmed by the possible suffering of his dog?

			Perhaps the answer is that his dog was special and somehow had deeper emotions and richer thoughts—that is, more mind—than his victims. Most of us would scoff at this idea. No matter how cunning Nilsen’s canine, we generally agree that people have more mind than dogs, which means that people deserve more compassion and concern than dogs. But Nilsen decided otherwise, believing that his dog had more mind than people, which gave Bleep essential moral rights denied to humans. Nilsen disagreed with the rest of us about the relative status of humans and dogs in the “mind club.”

			The mind club is that special collection of entities who can think and feel. It is that all-important league of mental heroes whose superpowers are not X-ray vision or teleportation but instead simply the ability for thought and emotion. Members in the mind club are “minds,” whereas nonmembers are simply “things.”

			Who belongs in this mind club? To begin with, we can probably rule out the turnip. It seems safe to say we aren’t missing much by assuming that there’s nobody home in there. At the other extreme are things that almost definitely have minds, like you and us. The snooty remark goes “and we’re not so sure about you,” but we are reasonably sure about you or we wouldn’t be bringing this up to you now.

			We are likely all members of the mind club. But how should we understand the things that fall between us and the turnip? What shall we make of dogs, chimpanzees, dolphins, elephants, or, for that matter, cats? Do they have minds? Really—cats? If we get serious about doorkeeping at the mind club, we also have to deal with newborn infants, unborn human fetuses, and people in persistent vegetative states—they could never be mistaken for turnips, but their minds can be sadly inscrutable.

			Then too we need to sort through the minds of intelligent robots and chess-playing supercomputers, angry mobs and cruel killers, and even companies like Google and Walmart. Some suggest that “corporations are people” and have their own minds—is that true? The application list for the mind club is already diverse, and we haven’t even mentioned entities that only some people believe in, such as gods or devils or angels or spirits of the dead. None of these things are turnips—but do they have minds?

			You’re probably thinking that you could sort through the candidates for the mind club pretty quickly, deciding who’s allowed past the bouncer and who has to wait outside in the cold. But could you explain how you decided, and would anyone agree with you? Scuffles over membership in the mind club have preoccupied philosophers for centuries, with no easy answers in sight.2 At one point the whole field of psychology split in two over the question of whether animals think—with behaviorists saying, “No way!” and everyone else saying “Wait a minute, what about my dog?”*3

			The questions about mind echo outside science and philosophy. Every day, judges and juries puzzle over just how “sound of mind” someone needs to be to bear responsibility for a crime. Mind is also the key to legal definitions of life itself. Consider the case of Jahi McMath, a little girl who was declared brain-dead after a botched tonsillectomy but whose parents still saw signs of mind in her hospital-bed twitches. At one point she was legally dead in California but legally alive in New Jersey—which ruling was correct depended on whether she had a mind.

			Membership in the mind club is immensely important, because it comes with clear privileges: those with minds are given respect, responsibility, and moral status, whereas those without minds are ignored, destroyed, or bought and sold as property. In historical cases where slavery was allowed, it was often justified by a belief that the enslaved people had a different kind of mind.

			Because of the importance of mind club membership, it would be nice if there were a clear admission rule to help us decide, just like the signs at amusement parks announcing that we have to be “at least this tall” to ride the roller coasters. Decisions of mind are quite easy at the extremes. Just as adults get to ride the coasters and toddlers are banished to the teacups, the extremes of mind are obvious: you have a mind and deserve moral rights, whereas the turnip doesn’t have a mind and can be eaten for dinner.

			But the tough questions about minds turn on nuance. Just as we’re not sure whether the kid with big hair and thick-soled shoes is really tall enough for the roller coaster, we cannot be sure whether a talented dog or developing fetus is in the club, or whether a sophisticated robot or someone with severe brain damage is out.

			The difficult cases of mind are called cryptominds. Some cryptominds have more “objective” mind than others. People can discuss Shakespeare, whereas dogs can only bark, but mind is seldom about these objective characteristics. Instead, as the case of Nilsen and Bleep suggests, mind is in the eye of the beholder. A mind is not an objective fact as much as it is a gift given by the person who perceives it. Mind is a matter of perception, with members being granted admission into the mind club based not on what they are but on what they appear to be. To get in, you need to look like you have a mind.

			There are many ways to look like you have a mind, such as wearing glasses or nodding knowingly when someone mentions Proust. But that’s not the point. The point is that minds are perceived into existence. The creation of minds through perception is best illustrated by a famous thought experiment known as the Turing test, which was devised in 1950 by British mathematician and computer scientist Alan Turing.*

			In the Turing test a person converses via text messages with two different entities—one human and one computer programmed to act like a human—and must decide which is which.4 At first this seems like an absurdly easy test, but as the cartoon caption goes, “On the Internet, no one knows you’re a dog.” What could you ask at the keyboard that could possibly determine whether there is a human mind on the other end?



					 						Figure 1: The Turing Test

						You (on the bottom) must decide which of two texting entities is a computer and which is a fellow human being.



				 			 			Any widely known facts or ideas would be useless, as a computer could easily be programmed to recall those, just like IBM’s Jeopardy-winning Watson. Instead you might think to quiz the mind candidate about human sensations—say, “Please describe the smell of old books” or “Tell me what it feels like to have an orgasm.” But a computer could be programmed to describe those things too: “Old books smell heavy and musty, like a sleepy old forest” or “An orgasm feels better than just about anything and is a little bit like a sneeze.” Of course, the computer can’t really have an orgasm, but with enough exclamation points, it could certainly fake it—and how would you know the difference?

			Turing thought that if you couldn’t tell which entity was a person and which was a computer, then the creator of the computer would have succeeded in making a mind—a genuine case of artificial intelligence. If a computer can fool you into perceiving a mind, then, by Jove, it has one.

			We do our own version of the Turing test every day as we discern which things have minds and which things don’t. But what do we mean when we say something has a mind? Is “mind” a single unified dimension with humans at the top and turnips at the bottom? Just as a single IQ scale can represent people’s general mental ability, perhaps we simply see minds from “no mind” to “maximum mind.”

			For many centuries theologians such as St. Thomas Aquinas have argued for this one-dimensional view, a “great chain of being” starting down at minerals and going up through vegetables, animals, people, the angels, and finally God.5 The one-dimensional view is also echoed by the philosophical approach of Daniel Dennett in his book Kinds of Minds.6 He suggests that there is a chain of perceiving mind through three different “stances.”

			The first is the “physical stance,” in which we view entities as completely mindless and understand them only through physical characteristics, such as mass and momentum. When we predict the action of a boulder, we need only know its weight and velocity. The second is the “design stance,” in which we view entities as themselves mindless but perceive the marks of mind upon them. When we use a screwdriver, for example, we understand that it was made by a mind for a purpose. Finally we can take the “intentional stance,” in which we recognize the behavior of entities as being based upon intention and desire. To predict people’s actions, it is certainly more useful to know what they think and want than their mass and momentum.

			These one-dimensional approaches to mind have long been the rule, but we wondered whether people might make finer distinctions, grading minds not just in terms of “more” or “less” mind but also on different mental capacities. Maybe we see mind along multiple dimensions, like the reading, writing, and math scores of the SAT. We might use dozens or even hundreds of ways of distinguishing minds from nonminds. Knowing how people naturally perceive minds is essential for understanding the trickiest cryptominds and the moral chaos that encircles them.

			One might think we’d need sophisticated tools to study mind perception—brain scanners, electrodes, Bunsen burners, and Erlenmeyer flasks—but instead we just asked some people. A lot of people. Together with Heather Gray,* we conducted an online survey that asked 2,499 people to judge both standard minds and cryptominds7—the “mind survey.” This was our first foray into the new science of mind perception, and these results form the foundation for this book. Our lab has since delved into robots,8 the dead and vegetative patients,9 adult film stars,10 torture victims,11 and God,12 but it all started with this single survey on mind perception.

			The survey began by introducing respondents to thirteen potential minds, each with descriptions and pictures: Sharon Harvey, an advertising executive; Todd Billingsley, an accountant; Nicholas Gannon, a five-month-old; Samantha Hill, a five-year-old; Toby, a wild chimpanzee; Gerald Schiff, a patient in a persistent vegetative state; Delores Gleitman, recently deceased; Charlie, a family dog; Kismet, a sociable robot built at the MIT Media Lab; a green frog; a seven-week human fetus; you, the respondent; and finally, God.

			We also selected nineteen different mental abilities, drawing from psychology, philosophy, and literature. The philosopher Jeremy Bentham discussed the importance of pain and pleasure in judgments of moral status, so we included them. The Stoics suggested that the capacities of self-control and planning were what separated the minds of people from those of other animals, so we included them. Through Hamlet’s famous speech about “What a piece of work is a man,” Shakespeare emphasized the human mental powers of thought and understanding, so we included them. As pure reason may not be sufficient for a full mind, we included feelings like joy, embarrassment, and emotion recognition. We also included more “physical” capacities like hunger and desire, and other capacities like memory, pride, and communication.

			Putting it all together, survey respondents were asked to compare the different characters on different mental abilities. One question asked, for example, if Samantha (the girl) is more or less likely to be able to feel pain than Toby (the chimpanzee). Most people, by the way, said “more.” We calculated average ratings for each mental ability across all characters, and then we used a technique called factor analysis to determine how the mental abilities clumped together. Did people rank all the cryptominds from “least mind” to “most mind” identically for every mental capacity?

			It turns out that mental abilities are not all clumped together. Instead, people see minds in terms of two fundamentally different factors, sets of mental abilities we labeled experience and agency.13

			The experience factor captures the ability to have an inner life, to have feelings and experiences. It includes the capacities for hunger, fear, pain, pleasure, rage, and desire, as well as personality, consciousness, pride, embarrassment, and joy. These facets of mind seemed to capture “what it is like” to have a mind—what psychologists and philosophers often talk about when they discuss the puzzle of consciousness. A mind with experience can feel what it is like to touch a hot stove, can enjoy going to the circus, and can have an orgasm.*

			The agency factor is composed of a different set of mental abilities: self-control, morality, memory, emotion recognition, planning, communication, and thought. The theme for these capacities is not sensing and feeling but rather thinking and doing. The agency factor is made up of the mental abilities that underlie our competence, intelligence, and action. Minds show their agency when they act and accomplish goals.

			A useful framework to help understand the differences between experience and agency is inside and outside. Experience is what minds are like from the inside, what it feels like to be a person, or a cat, or a bat. Because experience is a matter of being inside a mind, it can be very elusive to others. In contrast, agency is more transparent because it is what minds are like from the outside. We can determine an entity’s ability to plan and think simply by observing its actions and reactions. Said another way, experience is about inputs, as sensations and feelings generally are conveyed by sense organs like eyes and ears that feed in to minds. Conversely, agency is about outputs, movements and actions that feed out of minds.

			The two dimensions of experience and agency serve as the north-south and east-west axes of our “map” of cryptominds. Take a moment to look at it—this map is the guide to the rest of the book.



			 			 				Figure 2: The Map of Mind Perception

				Mind perception is measured on dimensions of agency and experience.



			 			Let’s take a quick tour of the map. First, it seems that normal, conscious, living adult humans like us (and executive Todd Billingsley and accountant Sharon Harvey) reside in the upper right corner, with both experience and agency. In contrast, the infant, the dog, and the frog (upper left) have some experience but little agency; they are entities for which people see that “someone is home,” but with diminished capacities to think and act. They are entities that can be harmed but that cannot harm us in return.

			Now continue the tour down the map. Below the animals and baby are the more cryptic cases of the human fetus and the PVS patient. These are cryptominds with very little agency but perhaps some experience; there might be someone home, but not anyone capable of answering the door. Even lower down is the dead woman (lower left), who is ascribed neither much experience nor agency—although it’s worth noting that she is not at zero. Perhaps we see dead people as having some mind because we remember their minds as they were during life. Or perhaps we see their minds because we believe in the afterlife, and how can there be heaven or hell without minds to feel joy and pain?

			As we continue to circle around the map, we move from the dead to the robot, which is perceived to have very little capacity for experience. Just imagine the classic science-fiction robot, which has no emotions and just keeps telling humans how irrational they are. A robot has the agency to help us safely explore the inside of a broken nuclear plant, but without experience it cannot help us explore the inside of a broken heart.

			And then, in the bottom right, we have the Almighty. As you might expect, God is perceived as very able to do things, but is, curiously, seen to have little experience. God’s mind may be great, but we don’t believe that He can feel hunger, fear, or even joy like the rest of us. Interestingly, in a replication of the mind survey, we discovered that corporations are seen to occupy the same location on the mind map. Like God, Google was seen as all agency and no experience.

			So far we have discovered that minds are a matter of perception and that people tend to see them along two dimensions. The bigger question you may be asking is, Why does it matter? As we hinted at earlier, mind perception forms the very basis for questions of life and death: entities with minds deserve moral consideration, whereas entities without minds do not. But if mind perception is split into agency and experience, how do these two factors relate to morality? To answer this question, we ask you to consider a thought experiment called “Baby vs. Robot.”

			It’s not about babies and robots fighting* but instead about two moral scenarios. In the first, imagine that the baby and the robot were just about to tumble off a cliff and you could save only one of them. Which would you save? Likely you would save the baby and let the robot fall to its doom. In the second scenario, imagine that the baby and the robot have found a loaded gun and are playing with it, when it goes off and injures someone. Which of them would you hold responsible? If you’re like most people, you would forgive the baby and condemn the robot to the junkyard.

			These two scenarios reveal that it is no fun being a robot, and also that someone needs to call child services on that baby’s parents. But most important, these scenarios demonstrate that there are two distinct kinds of moral status, not one. Questions of moral responsibility (Who deserves responsibility and punishment?) seem to be distinct from those of moral rights (Who deserves protection from harm?) because we protect the baby from harm and yet hold the robot morally responsible. This finding is striking because many have assumed that more mind equals more “morality,” with human adults having both rights and responsibilities and tables and turnips having neither.

			These two types of moral status (rights and responsibilities) not only are distinct but also map perfectly onto our two-dimensional mind map. To have moral rights you need to have experience, an inner life filled with feelings, and the potential for suffering. Conversely, to be morally responsible you need to have agency, to be able to plan, act, and appreciate the outputs of your thoughts. Babies have more experience than robots and so have more moral rights; robots have more agency than babies and so have more moral responsibility.

			Beyond babies and robots, the mind survey revealed that any entity with experience is seen to deserve moral rights, and any entity with agency is seen to deserve moral responsibility. The baby, the girl, the chimp, and the dog were seen as highest in experience, and survey takers also reported that these entities should be protected from harm. Conversely, adult humans, God, and Google were seen as highest in agency, and survey takers also reported that these entities should be held morally responsible for wrongdoing. Our hearts melt when children scream or puppies whimper—and our bile rises when we see adults (or others who should know better) causing them harm.

			The separation of agency/responsibility from experience/rights in our data was so striking that it seemed that we had discovered a deep fault line in mind perception. Like a border between two very different countries, this fault line—while normally invisible—separates two very different kinds of minds. On one side of the line are minds with agency and moral responsibility, and on the other side of the line are minds with experience and moral rights. Of course, just as there are dual citizens of two countries, some minds—like yours and mine—can live on both sides of this border, with both agency/responsibility and experience/rights. But as we’ll see throughout the book, the most interesting cryptominds are seen to belong to either one side of the line or the other. This separation between two kinds of minds has profound implications for ethical debates. In fact, it is so important that we will now say, in italics and without irony,


There are two kinds of perceived minds, each with its own type of morality—thinking doers and vulnerable feelers.

			Thinking doers are active minds with moral responsibility that do actions, minds like corporations and God. Vulnerable feelers are passive minds with moral rights that have actions done to them, minds like puppies, medical patients, and babies. This division of doer and feeler should feel intuitive because it is as ancient as human thought. The writings of Confucius,14 the yin and yang of ancient China,15 and the Tao Te Ching16 have long split the world into complementary opposites such as black and white, hot and cold, and good and evil. In mind perception these opposites are inner (experience) and outer (agency), input (experience) and output (agency), passive (experience) and active (agency), recipient (experience) and doer (agency), victim (experience) and aggressor (agency).

			These complementary types of thinking doers and vulnerable feelers are echoed in a similar distinction first introduced by Aristotle in the realm of morality: he divided the moral world into moral agents and moral patients.17 Moral agents are those entities who do (im)moral deeds; they are the performers of good and evil, the heroes and villains, the Gandhis and Hitlers, the cops and robbers. Conversely, moral patients are those entities who receive (im)moral deeds. They are the beneficiaries of good and the victims of evil, the rescued and injured, the adopted and orphaned. Moral agents are thus the thinking doers of the moral world, possessing agency and moral responsibility, whereas moral patients are the vulnerable feelers of the moral world, possessing experience and moral rights (see figure 3).



					 						Figure 3: Moral Agents and Patients

						There are two kinds of perceived minds.



			 			 			Agents and patients crisply divide the moral world into two, but remember that they are complementary opposites: agents act upon patients, and patients are acted upon by agents. Like husbands and wives, agents and patients whisper to each other, “You complete me.” Good and evil usually involve both moral agents and moral patients—they are the heads and the tails of the same moral coin. You can understand “out” only by considering “in,” “doer” by considering “recipient,” and “aggressor” by considering “victim.” To have one, you need the other, which means that good and evil almost always have a dyad of two different minds,* a doing agent and a feeling patient.

			Important examples of evil deeds all fit this dyadic template, including murder (murderer + deceased), theft (thief + victim), and child abuse (abuser + child). Even good deeds like a rescue have both a rescuer and a person in need. In contrast to these dyadic deeds, consider whether it is evil to cut off your own ear. Pulling a Vincent van Gogh might be gross, but it isn’t wrong in the same way as cutting off someone else’s ear, because self-injury doesn’t have two different minds for agent and patient.



					 						Figure 4: The Winged Demon

						Immorality or evil (represented by the winged demon) emerges through the combination of both thinking agent (left) and vulnerable patient (right).



				 			 			Some debate whether there are truly victimless (or agentless) wrongs, but we can agree that acts with obvious agents and patients are prototypically immoral. This dyadic nature of morality is illustrated in figure 4—when the malicious intention of a thinking agent is combined with the suffering of a vulnerable patient, you get the demon of immorality. This dyadic template is consistent with both psychological data on moral judgment18 and long-standing legal theory, which suggests that guilty verdicts require both someone having been harmed (the guilty act of actus reus) and someone having knowingly perpetrated the harm (the guilty mind of mens rea).19

			Seen from the perspective of mind perception, good and evil aren’t mystical forces that exist apart from humanity, but simply what emerges through the interaction of agents and patients. To create evil, just intentionally cause another mind to suffer (e.g., kick a dog), and to create good, just intentionally prevent another mind from suffering (e.g., stop a dog from being kicked). More formally, we can define both moral and immoral acts thus:


(Im)morality = Agency (of Agent) + Experience (of Patient)

			This definition reflects both the dyadic nature of good and evil and the kinds of mind (e.g., adult, child, animal, machine) in the agent and patient slots. To get maximum immorality, you should combine a very powerful agent and a very vulnerable patient. Conversely, for minimum immorality, you should combine a weak agent and an invulnerable patient. As evidence, consider a thought experiment that actually does involve fighting, “CEO vs. Little Girl!”

			Imagine that a CEO punches a little girl in the face. Chances are you’d think this is immoral. Now imagine that a little girl punches a CEO in the face. Chances are you’d think this is funny. Indeed, children injuring adults is a staple of hilarious YouTube videos, whereas adults injuring children is a staple of (decidedly unfunny) Lifetime movies.

			The evil of CEOs harming kids, but not of kids harming CEOs, is perfectly consistent with our formula; CEOs are mostly thinking doers, whereas kids are mostly vulnerable feelers, and so only one combination trips our evil detector. Linking mind perception to morality not only explains the enduring hilarity of kids injuring unsuspecting adults but also allows you to predict your moral outrage about almost any infraction. Tough man (high agency) punches kitten (high experience)? Immoral. Kitten (low agency) scratches tough man (low experience)? Not immoral. When you become enraged at an instance of moral depravity, chances are someone very agentic is harming someone (or something) very patientic. This idea of dyadic morality will be important throughout the book as we explore our different reactions to cryptominds causing and receiving harm, such as child-killing pigs and medical patients left to die.

			Well, it’s only the first chapter, and already we’ve accused your mother of being a zombie, explored the structure of mind perception, and revealed how mind perception defines good and evil. In the chapters to come, we will revisit many of these themes as we explore the neighborhoods of the mind map. We’ll discover the best way to escape blame (chapter 2), why natural disasters increase belief in God (chapter 9), why vegetative patients are seen as more dead than the dead (chapter 6), why conspiracy theories are irresistible (chapter 7), and how good and evil can make people physically more powerful (chapter 4).

			We’ll start in the next chapter with the mind of the Animal, the prototypical cryptomind. Nonhuman animals may not be able to talk (at least not well), but they do provide lots of physical cues to mind—movements and expressions and apparent goals and joys and sorrows. Animal minds are an important puzzle, one that shaped the history of psychology and that continues to bother everyone who ever ate something that could once look back at them.

			Our next stop will be the mind of the Machine. No one is tempted to see a mind in a pair of scissors, but we do glimpse mind when machines become complex and marvelous. Machine minds—like Jeopardy-winning computers—seem mostly to have agency and not experience, but new technology is leading to humanlike machines that also appear to feel emotions. We’ll see, however, that such experiencing minds are not universally loved and can be downright uncanny.

			The Patient investigates how we see someone who is sick or in treatment or in trouble. We typically see these minds through the lens of empathy, appreciating what it is like for them to feel pain, pleasure, or other feelings. Although empathy can make us attuned to experience, it can also blind us to agency. The analysis of patients also highlights the special world of medicine—those professionals who work with patients and who can sometimes lose sight of their minds.

			Some minds are cryptic because of our feelings about them. From the person who stole our parking space to the trusted friend who slept with our spouse, we have trouble seeing the mind of the Enemy. The hate and fear we feel toward enemies blinds us to their agency and experience through the process of dehumanization—turning people into objects. In war, dehumanization may help a soldier do his job, but in everyday life it can make us callous and insensitive to the suffering of others.

			Some of the most enigmatic minds we encounter are the Silent—humans who can’t communicate. The silent include those in vegetative states and those who are locked in—with thoughts but no capacity to move—both of which bring up important ethical issues. Brain-scanning methods offer new hope for perceiving these cryptominds, but meanwhile families and caregivers try desperately to do mind reading of their own and sometimes mistake their own thoughts for those of the silent.

			Then there is the mind of the Group. A group, such as a corporation, doesn’t have a single brain, but this doesn’t us stop us from talking about it as if it has a mind (e.g., “Google challenges Microsoft’s lead”). Groups typically seem to have more agency than experience, which means that people in groups can do evil but not suffer it. These perceptions suggest why groups are often implicated in paranoia about conspiracies.

			And do the Dead have minds? About four out of five Americans believe in life after death. Not nearly as many believe they can communicate with the dead, but believing in an afterlife means that many must also believe in an aftermind. Gathered at the graveside with others who knew the dearly departed, we may perceive the mind of the dead in almost the same way we perceive the mind of the living. The reasons for this perception are many, including our wishes for immortality and dualism, the apparent disconnect between mind and body.

			God is a mind often believed in but seldom seen. Even without direct evidence of His existence, much of the world believes in an ultimate agent in charge. Religious belief can be understood, at least in part, as an extension of our natural tendency toward mind perception, which has been honed through millions of years of evolution. We will also see why people are especially likely to see God’s mind in randomness and suffering.

			There is one mind we don’t need to perceive from the outside, one that should not be a cryptomind at all: the mind of the Self. But there are times when our own minds can be cryptic, when we lose sight of ourselves and fail to grasp our own agency and experience. This chapter shows how learning about other minds ultimately allows us to understand our own.

			Minds are paradoxically both incredibly important and incredibly ambiguous, and the friction between these two truths starts the fire that burns throughout this book. The following pages will reveal new ideas, unbelievable stories, and cutting-edge science from our lab and those of others. They will also show why mind perception matters so much, from lightning storms of legal conflict to losing (and sometimes finding again) the people we love. Again and again you will see that the world of minds is seldom what it first seems to be. Welcome to the mind club.





Chapter 2


			 			 			THE ANIMAL





One curious entertainment of sixteenth-century London was the Bear Garden. In front of cheering crowds, a monkey dressed in a little suit would appear on horseback. Then out would come an angry pack of bulldogs or mastiffs trained to attack the poor monkey. The sorry horse was attacked by the dogs as well but could last for quite a while, at least until the bears were sent in. Then, to the delight of the crowd, the horse, the dogs, and the little monkey (if he was still alive) all quickly became shrieking, thrashing, and bloody bear food.1

			In contrast to these callous British peasants, Jain monks and nuns are so averse to the suffering of animals that they sweep their paths to prevent treading a bug underfoot.2 Jains even avoid eating root vegetables such as turnips* because they believe that roots are especially essential to life. After all, if you’re a turnip, even vegetarians are murderers. Somewhere between the blood-sport fans at the Bear Garden and the gentle Jains are the rest of us, wondering how to think about the minds of nonhuman animals.

			Animals are the classic cryptomind because, despite all their signs of life, they lack language. Without this rich communicative ability, it is hard to accurately gauge their levels of agency and experience. How much of an animal’s behavior is survival instinct versus calculated thought and deep emotion? Is a raccoon disgusted with germs when it washes its food? When a robin flies into the picture window, is it filled with embarrassment and self-recrimination or just simple pain? Does your dog love you the same way you love it? Most important, is it wrong to have sex with livestock? Stay tuned.

			You might wonder why we’re skipping over plants in our search for nonhuman minds. Well, we’re not. It is worth considering whether plants have minds and—most important for morality—whether they are capable of suffering.3 Ancient mystics and modern hippies alike have long held that trees have minds, and this idea of plant minds was darkly transformed by Roald Dahl in “The Sound Machine.”

			In this short story a man develops a radio capable of hearing frequencies normally out of range of the human ear,4 and as he listens one afternoon, he hears a series of painful screams. He suddenly realizes that they coincide with the snipping of blossoms off a rosebush; the radio reveals suburban yard work as genocide, with every cut of the pruning shears causing unbearable agony to sentient flora around him. This scenario may not be as far-fetched as it seems. Imagine the smell of fresh-cut grass. What smells like lazy summers to you is actually the panic pheromone released by each severed blade, letting its neighbors know that the fearsome lawnmower is coming for them too.5

			Although grass and other plants have remarkably complex defense systems,6 do they belong in the mind club? Unlikely. Entities with minds typically have complex nervous systems, which plants seem to lack.7 Some believe that plants can think and feel anyway, such as J. C. Bose—the cult hero who in 1914 attached a voltage meter to a carrot and claimed to find evidence of emotion8—and Cleve Backster, an interrogation specialist for the CIA and a pioneer in the use of polygraph technology.

			Backster received widespread attention when he attached the dracaena* in his office to a polygraph machine and ran a series of tests including burning the leaves, threatening the plant with harm, and even killing shrimp in the next room over. To Backster, the resulting polygraph readings suggested that plants could not only experience pain and fear but also empathize telepathically with the death of the distant shrimp.9 Unfortunately for Backster, his work proved difficult to replicate and was ultimately “busted” on the television program MythBusters.10 Plants may not have telepathic empathy, but their actions are often more intelligent, intricate, and adaptive than anything humans could devise. By some measures, plants have agency and perhaps even experience, but we usually fail to attribute them mind because their signs of agency and experience mainly occur in slow motion.

			We do see glimpses of mind in especially fast species of plants. Mimosa pudica—“sensitive plants”—will retract its leaves quickly when touched and so seems to experience our contact.11 Dionaea muscipula—Venus flytraps—will snap shut on unsuspecting insects and then slowly digest them, in an apparently agentic feat of carnivorous cunning.12 With slower-acting plants we often see mind when their movements are captured in time-lapse films: flowers springing open and slamming shut, leaves clamoring for the sun as it traverses the sky, or vines encircling hapless trees in their quest for height. Just a few minutes of watching vines climb in David Attenborough’s The Private Life of Plants will convince you they’re active and smarter than many of your coworkers.

			Seen in everyday slow motion, however, plants seem to lack mind because they take so long to respond to their environment. Imagine someone who touched a hot stove and removed their hand only after a couple of hours—that person wouldn’t seem like the sharpest tool in the shed. Curiously, it’s also hard for us to see intelligence in things that move very quickly, to track the logic of darting dragonflies or scurrying cockroaches. As noted by philosopher Daniel Dennett, it seems like minds are maximally perceived at human speed.13 Only when things move at the same scale as you do they seem to have feelings and intentions. Comedian George Carlin said it best in terms of freeway driving: “Ever notice that anyone going slower than you is an idiot, but anyone going faster than you is a maniac?”

			The technical term for this tendency is timescale anthropocentrism. “Anthropo-” comes from the Greek word anthropos, meaning human, and “-centrism” simply means a specific orientation or focus. Timescale anthropocentrism is the idea that we see the world—including minds—from the perspective of human time. This idea is illustrated by a study from our lab, led by Carey Morewedge and Jesse Preston, in which participants were asked to rate the minds of different animals, some of which moved very slowly (e.g., sloths) and some of which moved very quickly (e.g., houseflies).14



			Figure 5: Anthropocentrism in Mind Perception

			Things that move with a humanlike speed are perceived to have more mind.

			C. K. MOREWEDGE, J. PRESTON, AND D. M. WEGNER, “TIMESCALE BIAS IN THE ATTRIBUTION OF MIND,” JOURNAL OF PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 93, NO. 1 (2007). REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION.

				 			 			As figure 5 reveals, there was a slight tendency for people to see more mind (rated consciousness and capacity for intention) in faster animals (shown by the solid sloped line)—it is better to be the hare than the tortoise. The more striking pattern in the graph is an inverted U shape (shown by the dotted curve), whereby both very slow and very fast animals are seen to have little mind, and human-speeded animals like dogs and cats are seen to have the most mind. This makes evolutionary sense, as potential predators and prey are all creatures moving at roughly our speed, and so it pays to understand their intentions and feelings. In the modern world we seldom have to worry about catching deer and evading wolves, but timescale anthropomorphism stays with us; in the dance of perceiving other minds, it pays to move at the same speed as everyone else.

			People are anthropocentric beyond the scale of time, with any similarities to humans increasing perceived mind.15 We expect members of the mind club to be approximately human size, live a humanlike number of years, speak with a humanlike voice, and have a humanlike number of limbs and amount of hair. This is why, in science-fiction movies, the aliens look suspiciously like humans (e.g., Yoda, Klingons, the Predator, Chewbacca). Sure, they may be a bit bigger, live a little longer, speak with a slight accent (but still speak English—what are the odds!?*), have a couple of extra arms or a touch more hair, but they are mostly human. Imagine a film where humans discover an intelligent alien that is the size of a continent and thinks in the span of years: instant box-office flop.

			We expect minds to be like us, and this anthropocentrism isn’t just selfishness because—at least within the animal kingdom—humans typically do have the most mind. Not only have humans constructed skyscrapers and discovered quantum mechanics, but we have firsthand evidence of human agency and experience from our own minds. So when we grapple with an animal cryptomind, we use its humanness as a rough guide for its level of mind. Of course, questions of “humanness” can be as ambiguous as those of mind, and so we often rely upon simple physical features, such as the presence of eyes.

			Imagine that you walked into a classroom and saw a couple of lines and dots on the chalkboard. If they were oriented like this

			 .\ /.

			chances are you’d stand farther away than if they were oriented like this

			 ./ ./

			Why? The first set looks not only like eyes and eyebrows but like angry eyes and eyebrows.16 We are especially attuned to eyes because they convey a surprising amount of information (compared with the elbow), including both agency and experience. Agency-wise, eyes can convey the focus of attention, which suggests intention and the next likely course of action; experience-wise, eyes can convey emotion by narrowing in anger or widening in fear.17,18 It’s no accident that we see mind in our pets when we stare into their eyes—and ignore the potential minds of creatures without obvious humanlike eyes, such as plants and insects.

			Complex movement is another human trait that leads us to ascribe mind.19 Something that chases and follows, darts and weaves, hides and seeks, seems to have more mind than something that just sits there. People attribute minds even to simple squares and triangles when their movements suggest goals and reactions.20 In fact, movement is such a robust cue to mind that only those with brain damage fail to see mind in moving shapes.21 Like eyes, movement connotes both agency and experience. Thinking doers enact their goals through moving, and vulnerable feelers move away from pain and toward pleasure. Many animals seem to do both.

			Eyes and movement are general indicators of mind, but other cues are more specific and convey either agency or experience. Agency is about acting and doing, so effectors are cues to agency. Effectors are active or changeable body parts that move, influence, or otherwise affect the external world, and include humanlike hands, arms, legs, and tongues, and nonhumanlike wings, tentacles, claws, glowing abdomens (in lightning bugs), squirting ink sacs (in octopi), and on and on. The more effectors they have, the more animals can do, and often the more they can harm us, such as with fangs, stingers, and horns.

			As experience is about sensing and feeling, physical cues to experience are sensors, body parts that are involved in conveying sensations to a mind. Eyes, ears, noses, antennae, and feelers are all routes through which minds learn about the world around them. As sensations happen only inside minds, we use reactions as proxies for experience. When a dog gives a series of little sniffs followed at the end by a big shnoof, it seems to be reacting to a smell. Movements such as changing gaze direction, perking up the ears, orienting the body, and reaching to touch are apparent reactions to stimuli.

			If you sense a familiar pattern in the cues to experience and agency, you are right. Sensors are how animals receive input, and reactions are indicators of what it is like to be inside an animal’s mind. Effectors are how animals output, translating wants and desires into action.

			Although all animals likely have some agency and experience, not all animal minds are perceived equally. People undoubtedly see more mind in cats and dogs than in sheep and crows—but are these perceptions justified? How accurate are we in our mind club admission decisions when it comes to animals?

			Like all minds, animal minds may be forever inaccessible, but there are animal intelligence tests. These tests measure the agency-related outputs of animals minds—their ability to think and do. Typically these tests specifically examine problem-solving skills, because book smarts are useless unless you can apply them to real life. If you’ve ever put a piece of steak at the bottom of a narrow cup and delighted while a dog spent fruitless minutes trying to fit his snout down there, you understand this important problem-solving test. You think, “If only Fido would grab the tongs, this would be much easier!”

			Tongs may be scarce in the wild, but some animals will use tools if available. When faced with a termite colony, hungry chimpanzees thread a stick down into it, wait until the termites begin to crawl upon it, and then pull it out to reveal a delicious insect Popsicle.22 Chimps also use rocks to help open nuts23 and appear to make spears to help them kill their prey.24 Although chimps may be the most sophisticated in their use of tools, they are not alone. For example, crows will insert leaves into logs so that ants climb up the serrated edges and into their waiting mouths.25

			The intelligence of so-called bird brains may seem surprising, but crows and other members of the Corvidae family (i.e., corvids), such as scrub jays and ravens, are actually quite clever and can understand fundamental physics.26 There were no crows on the team that discovered the Higgs boson, but they can match the knowledge of young children.

			Aesop’s fable “The Crow and the Pitcher” tells the tale of a crow wishing to drink water from the bottom of a pitcher. The crow collects pebbles, dropping them one by one into the pitcher until the water level is high enough for him to drink.27 Researchers tested this fable in real life by presenting crows with a narrow vase half filled with water with a treat floating in it (figure 6).28 The water level was too low for the crow to reach the treat, but there was a pile of little rocks nearby. As in the fable, the solution was to put the rocks in the vase to raise the water level, and crows had no problem figuring it out, even beating out some children.



			Figure 6: The Crow and the Pitcher

			To get the treat, the water level must be raised by dropping objects into the vase. On this and other tasks, crows show surprising ingenuity.

			A. H. TAYLOR ET AL., “NEW CALEDONIAN CROWS LEARN THE FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES OF NOVEL TOOL TYPES,” PLOS ONE 6 (2011): E26887.

			 			 			However, crows were stumped by a similar scenario in which rocks had to be put in a second vase connected to the first vase by a sneaky invisible tube under the table, which raised the water level in both vases. Unlike crows, children did manage to solve this problem, even though they had no idea how the water level in the second vase affected the water level in the first vase—many called it “magic.”*

			Birds not only use tools and understand physics but also are some of the few animals that can actually dance to a beat. You may disagree with this blanket statement, recalling times at which your dog seemed to groove to the radio, but it is unlikely that you ever went to the trouble of computing a Fourier transform of Fido’s moves. On the other hand, a team of researchers led by Adena Schachner did compute Fourier transforms on a number of different “dancing” animals.

			Fourier transforms are mathematic operations that show the frequencies underlying periodic (i.e., repeated) motion. For example, if you had a pendulum that swung back and forth every two seconds, the Fourier transform would show a single spike at 0.50 hertz (half a cycle per second). The Fourier transform of the light given off by a burning butane torchlight would show spikes at around 588 gigahertz (green) and 705 gigahertz (blue).* Schachner and her colleagues examined more than a thousand YouTube videos of animals dancing (i.e., moving while music was playing), including dogs, cats, horses, ferrets, fish, snakes, rabbits, woodpeckers, pigs, pigeons, goats, and elephants. They performed a Fourier transform on both each animal’s movements and the background music and by comparing them could tell which animals were dancing to the beat and which were just flailing around.

			The analysis revealed that the only animals that can keep rhythm are those that engage in vocal mimicry, such as songbirds, parrots, hummingbirds, elephants, bats, and humans. Of course, these results can’t stop you from perceiving your pets as musically gifted, but it does suggest that this ability evolves only among a narrow set of evolutionary conditions.

			Humans certainly perceive rhythm and other mental abilities in animals, but do animals perceive mind in other animals? Early research on this question focused on chimpanzees because they were the most humanlike of animals, both in terms of DNA and in mental abilities. In one popular paradigm, two researchers would show a chimp some delicious food (e.g., a banana),* before one researcher (the “knower”) went behind a screen and hid the food beneath one of four cups. While the knower was doing the hiding, the other experimenter (the “guesser”) would stand with a bucket over his head, making him or her blind to the proceedings. Thus the knower would know the exact location of the food, whereas the guesser could only choose a cup at random.

			The knower and the guesser would then each point to a different cup. The smart choice in this scenario is to trust the knower to indicate the location of the food. However, this requires understanding the content of others’ minds, realizing that the bucketless experimenter knows something that the bucketed-headed experimenter does not. Chimps overwhelmingly failed this task, showing no preference for the cups indicated by the knower,29 a result most scientists interpreted as indicating that chimps lack the ability to perceive the minds of others. Others weren’t so sure.

			These more optimistic folks believed that researchers were simply using the wrong paradigm to assess mind perception. They reasoned that if evolution had endowed chimps with mind perception it wasn’t for playing bucket-head with humans but instead for outcompeting other chimps. In the wild chimpanzees seldom do cooperative tasks with humans, but they do frequently try to steal the food or mates of other chimpanzees.

			To test this “conspecific competition” hypothesis, researchers set up two caches of food in a courtyard: one in plain sight of a high-ranking chimp, the other hidden from his view by a wooden screen. They then released a hungry junior chimp into the courtyard and observed. If chimpanzees lack the ability to understand other minds (like the thoughts of the big, bad, dominant chimp), then this junior chimp would foolishly try to take the visible food. But if chimpanzees could understand other minds, then this junior chimp would take the perspective of the dominant chimp and realize that he should steal only the hidden food.

			The junior chimp ignored the visible food and instead went to the hidden cache.30 Watching videos of this behavior, you’d swear that—if it were only possible—the junior chimp would put its hands in its pockets and start whistling, just to indicate that nothing suspicious was going on.

			Other animals also have the ability to appreciate mental states in suitably naturalistic situations. If crows or scrub jays (our physicist corvids) notice another bird watching them while they are hiding their food, they will come back and move their stash—suggesting that they understand the knowledge of other birds.31 Dolphins are also thought to have sophisticated mind perception and can easily follow the gazes or gestures of humans to complete a task, such as fetching specific objects.32

			However, the real champions of understanding mental states—at least those of humans—are dogs, because they coevolved with us.33 Over millennia we fed, petted, and sheltered the dogs that knew what we were thinking, and we killed, beat, and exiled the dogs that were oblivious to our desires. This gives modern-day dogs an amazing ability to read human thoughts, although not in the mysterious telepathic sense.* Instead they read our nonverbal cues, such as gaze and pointing.

			In one demonstration, researchers put in front of a dog two smell-proof boxes, only one of which contained food. When the dog’s owner pointed to the correct box, dogs almost always went to it.34 This may seem unremarkable, but if you do the same exercise with chimpanzees, they never pick up the cues. You can point and dance and pelvic thrust at the correct box on hundreds of trials and chimps will never get it right. Cats, on the other hand, when observing a human pointing at the correct box, will look at the human derisively and then vigorously lick their own crotch.

			One general criticism leveled at animal researchers is that they are inventing rather than objectively observing minds, projecting their own hopes and desires onto animals, and mistaking their own complex social understanding for that of the animals. The most organized criticism of animal minds was the behaviorist movement in psychology, which sought to remove references of mental states from descriptions of animal (and human) behavior. In particular, behaviorism led chimpanzee researchers to try to remove all humanlike language from accounts of chimpanzee behavior. The result, as described by Donald Hebb in 1946, was “an almost endless series of specific acts in which no order or meaning could be found.”35

			Compare the informational value of “A approached B, A touched B’s back, and A removed something from B’s back; later, B approached A, B touched A’s back, B removed something from A’s back, and A and B vocalized” with “A and B happily groomed each other.” The latter not only is more informative and succinct but also makes for a more compelling story. Importantly, any mind-rich descriptions are wrong only when animals lack the mental capacities we ascribe to them, and the research we’ve examined suggests that perceptions of mind are justified in many species.

			We often like to think of humanity as standing on a different level of evolution, but more similarities between us and nonhuman animals are being revealed every day. Even language—classically held to be the sole dominion of humans—exists in some forms in animals. The gray parrot Alex knew hundreds of words, as does Koko the gorilla, who uses American Sign Language to communicate her desires. Many animals also seem to have a concept of the “self,” demonstrated by the ability to recognize themselves in a mirror. In humans this capacity doesn’t emerge until the age of eighteen to twenty-four months.36 To test this with your own child, put a big red mark on his forehead before sitting him in front of the mirror. If your kid madly rubs at his own forehead, he has the power of self-recognition, but if he just chuckles and thinks, “Look at that dumbass,” he has yet to approach the intellectual sophistication of chimps, dolphins, and elephants.37

			These impressive displays of animal thinking suggest that—even if humans are the pinnacle of evolution—other creatures may not be too far down the mountain. The apparent amount of animal agency poses a natural next question: do animals also have experience? People certainly perceive animals to have sensations and emotions—to be vulnerable feelers. In the mind map from chapter 1, we saw that animals are viewed as possessing much more experience than agency, even as being on par with humans. We may debate whether animals can think deeply, but most people have no doubt that animals can feel deeply. Is this true?

			There is a video you may have seen, and it may have brought tears to your eyes. It concerns two British men, John Rendall and Anthony “Ace” Berg, who in 1969 rescued a lonely lion cub from his tiny cage, brought him home, and named him Christian. These two big men fed Christian from a bottle and played with him in a local churchyard, and when he quickly grew too big for their apartment, they facilitated his release back into the wilds of Africa. Months later they went to Kenya to check up on their feline friend, but they were told that he was now fully wild and that he would not remember them. Undeterred, they trekked to his location and filmed their encounter.

			The video begins with John, Ace, and Christian walking toward each other across some rocks. As the lion approaches the men, he quickens his pace, and there is a moment of apprehension as Christian jumps toward them with paws outstretched, but he attacks them only with love and gives them a big hug. Wishful thinking be damned, there is no other word that fits: he stands up on his hind legs and embraces them with his paws. The two men whoop and snuggle him; he hasn’t forgotten his surrogate parents and the love they gave.

			Contrast this case with the case of Timothy Treadwell—aka the Grizzly Man. Treadwell was an ardent environmentalist who spent summers in Alaska living with the grizzly bears. In his videos it seems that the bears had really accepted him as one of their own, letting him touch them and even play with their cubs. However, near the end of his thirteenth Alaskan summer, something went wrong. The day before he was scheduled to be picked up, his video camera recorded his being attacked and eaten by the very animals he had dedicated his life to protecting. The lens cap was on and the tape was almost finished, so the footage is brief and consists only of audio, but it is more than enough to break your heart. Being eaten alive is not a kind way to go.

			The difficulty with loving animals so much is that we expect them to love us back in the same way. We would never think of eating our pets while they are still conscious and so expect the same consideration from animals we love. But are animals even capable of these deep experiences? That is a difficult question. With agency there are outward signs, instances of thinking doing like putting stones in a vase or picking the right box; but the sensations and emotions of experience are especially cryptic because they can really be known only from the inside. But as with Christian the lion, there can certainly be compelling cues.

			Elephants, for example, will show remarkable compassion for their fellows. In one case a junior elephant named Grace repeatedly tried to help an elderly elephant named Eleanor.38 Eleanor was having trouble walking, and Grace would try to prop her up and nudge her along when she stumbled. When Eleanor became too weak and stumbled and fell for the last time, Grace stood by her side as night fell, letting out cries of mourning.

			Likewise, Dutch anthropologist Frans de Waal has observed bonobos and chimpanzees for thousands of hours and has seen many examples of touching kindness in these primates.39 Closer to home there are stories of dogs walking across the country to return home to their owners, just as in Homeward Bound, and when cats flop down and purr, they definitely seem to want to be close. Of course, they will also eat the corpses of their dead owners.40

			People often debate whether we’re witnessing actual compassion or misinterpreting pure instinct. Does an animal have a sense of kindness, or does it merely act as if it did? Unfortunately, assessing actions remains the best we can do because animals lack language to tell us their motives. Practically speaking, these deeper motives may be irrelevant. If you are the mother of the three-year-old boy who fell into the gorilla enclosure at Brookfield Zoo, it matters little why the gorilla Binti Jua carefully cradled your son and brought him to the keeper, all the while protecting him from other gorillas.41 The important point is that she saved your son.

			Animals not only respond to those who are vulnerable or suffering—moral patients—but also respond to moral agents when they are victims of injustice. In one example researchers had two monkeys complete the same task but gave one a better reward. The monkey that got the short end of the deal realized he was being screwed over and refused to participate in future tasks.42 Monkeys will also perpetrate revenge against those who have wronged them and even attack family members of their enemies.43 A study we conducted also suggests that monkeys understand the moral concept of “paying it forward,” an idea popularized by the eponymous movie starring Haley Joel Osment, Helen Hunt, and Kevin Spacey.

			Most times in life, when someone does something good for us, our first inclination is to pay them back and return the favor, but paying it forward instead involves doing something good for an entirely new person—often with the hope that you’re forging the first link in a chain of goodness stretching into the future. Both our research and that of others suggests that people will indeed pay it forward.44 If the previous person in line bought your coffee, you will buy a coffee for the next person, and we wondered if monkeys would do the same.

			We tested this idea by putting monkeys as a middle link of a chain of three monkeys, where they would receive an outcome from the first monkey and give an outcome to the third monkey. Monkeys could receive one of two outcomes, either a delicious prized grape or an unappealing piece of spinach. Importantly, it was completely costless for monkeys to give grapes, because the monkey doing the passing always got a grape. In sum, the monkeys chose between option A (me: grape, other: grape) and option B (me: grape, other: spinach), so the only reason they would give another monkey spinach was out of spite.

			We found that monkeys paid forward their outcomes. When the second monkey received a grape, it would give the third monkey a grape, but when the second monkey received a piece of spinach, all hell broke loose—it jumped and screamed and looked disgustedly at the first monkey. It then gave a piece of spinach to the third monkey, who reacted the same way, forging a new link in the chain of injustice.45 In contrast, when adult humans are in analogous situations, we swallow our anger and break the chain of greed by passing on the good outcome. It seems that monkeys have enough of a moral sense to recognize injustice, but not enough to rise above it.

			In general, it is clear that many animals care about being kind and having justice but may fail to act upon these concerns because of agency limitations. Despite some sophisticated reasoning, nonhuman animals have very small prefrontal cortices—just like teenagers—and therefore lack impulse control and the ability to understand how their actions affect others.* An animal might be snuggly and friendly 99 percent of the time, but when hungry, or frightened, or angered, all bets are off.

			People recognize this relative lack of agency, and so we gravitate toward animals that are small, cuddly, sweet, and harmless. Chalk this up to evolution. Prehistoric people who tried to snuggle with rattlesnakes and cougars weren’t alive long enough to pass on their genes, unlike those who loved hamsters and guinea pigs. No wonder people are far more likely to develop phobias of snakes, spiders, and things with sharp teeth than of bunnies or butterflies.46 We have evolved to recognize dangerous animals quickly but also, apparently, to pet and cuddle those animals that roll over on their backs and let us rub their tummies.

			Our love of pets sometimes seems to outweigh our love of fellow people. In news coverage of natural disasters, cameras and newscasters often focus on the animals that succumb to or survive peril, such as the cat that swam through severe floodwaters in northern Canada. Thousands of people have lost their homes and some have died, but SWIMMING SENSATION MOMO THE CAT ESCAPES ALBERTA FLOOD! shouts a front-page headline.47

			Of course, if you explicitly ask others, they will acknowledge that people have richer minds than animals and therefore warrant more moral concern—but it is hard to remember this fact when you see a puppy whimpering. Our concern with animal welfare also makes sense when you consider the deep fault line we discovered between the two kinds of minds: vulnerable feelers and thinking doers. As our pets are less thinking doers and more vulnerable feelers, we consistently place them in the moral patient camp, focusing on their suffering and worrying about their mistreatment while generally forgiving their trespasses against us.

			Of course, those same people cheering for Momo on the nightly news are also likely eating their dinners of beef, pork, or chicken. How are we to make sense of this contradiction? Why is the death of a pet a tragedy and the death of a chicken a routine step toward dinner? One potential reason is that the inscrutability of animal minds leaves lots of wiggle room in questions of moral concern. Consider the difference between Michael Vick and Joaquin Phoenix.

			NFL quarterback Michael Vick has a great arm and rushing yards befitting a running back, but he is infamous for running a brutal dogfighting ring. When authorities searched his estate, they found seventy caged dogs—mostly pit bulls—who were trained to fight one another to the death. Dogs who survived fights but were too injured to keep fighting were killed by Vick and his associates.48

			In contrast to the callous Vick, the actor Joaquin Phoenix is so concerned with animal suffering that he has been a vegan since he was three years old, when he saw a fish suffocating in the bottom of a boat during a family fishing trip.49 He has narrated award-winning documentaries on animal abuse in the farming industry and requires that his movies not use captive animals. He has even filmed a commercial for PETA in which he pretends to drown, mirroring the suffocating fish he saw so many years ago. For Phoenix and Vick, the issue of animal rights seems to be one of extremes—either all animals are sacred or any can be killed for sport—but for most people animal rights involve shades of gray: puppy killing is heinous, but it’s okay to have the odd mollusk for dinner.

			How do people decide which animals count as moral patients? With mind perception, of course. Animals perceived to have mind are given moral rights, whereas those without aren’t. It may seem that we base membership in the mind club on agency, as laws to protect apes and dolphins often reference their intelligence.50 For example, in 2008 the Spanish parliament passed a nonbinding resolution giving basic human rights to great apes, who are among our closest genetic relatives. This law prevents cruelty to apes and forbids their killing except in cases of self-defense. Proponents of the law cited the apes’ advanced cognitive abilities—but also their ability to feel fear, jealousy, and love.51

			The truth is that people extend more protection to kittens than crows, despite the fact that corvids are much smarter. This suggests that animal rights are more a matter of experience than of agency—an idea confirmed by our mind survey, which revealed that animals are seen as vulnerable feelers. This importance of experience is captured eloquently by the philosopher Jeremy Bentham, who wrote that “the question [of animal rights] is not, Can they reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?”52

			Because animals lack language, and experience exists inside minds, it is difficult to decipher whether animals feel pain the same as we do. Animals may writhe and yelp when injured, but classically these signs were thought to be mere reflexes and not to represent “real” pain. Descartes believed animals were little automatons that were driven by the biological equivalent of springs and levers; they might cry out, but that was only because of mechanical linkages, just as your alarm clock might cry out when morning comes.53

			The inscrutability of experience means that we rely heavily on external cues to understand animal pain—things like big eyes, obvious expressions, and human likeness. This is why, in the mind survey, puppies were given more protection than tree frogs, which have small eyes and no clear way of crying out and aren’t even mammals like us. Reliance on these external cues can lead to an overemphasis on “cuteness” in animal rights. That we can eat bacon with abandon and donate money to stop seal clubbing—despite the impressive intelligence of pigs54—is a notable reversal of objective mental qualities. In this way we are—if only a tiny bit—like serial killer Dennis Nilsen, who saw his dog as a mind club member but not his fellow humans. Those we admit to the mind club may not be the most deserving but instead those with whom we emotionally connect.



					 						Figure 7: Pigheaded?

						We feel more at ease at the idea of eating pigs than seals, even though pigs likely have richer inner lives.



			 			 			Even when animals are relatively uncute, thinking about their suffering can still make people squirm. We think of cows as stupid and label their meat “beef” to maintain distance between ourselves and dinner. If meat is mindless, then it isn’t really cruel. This link between mind and morality has been demonstrated by a clever experiment led by psychologist Steve Loughnan in which grocery store shoppers were given free samples of either cashews or beef jerky. After eating, shoppers filled out a mind survey that included mental ratings of a cow. The researchers discovered that while the nut eaters perceived the cow to have substantial mind, the meat eaters stripped away its thoughts and feelings.55 An elegant follow-up study found that simply labeling an animal as “food” drastically decreased the animal’s perceived capacity for suffering.56

			The denial of mind to animals we eat is especially obvious in factory farming. Consider the language of an employee of one turkey factory farm, in which birds with freakish genes have their beaks seared off, are pumped full of antibiotics, and are fed until they can’t even walk around their tiny wire cage: “The farmer has no choice but to produce food at a lower production cost, and genetically he’s going to move toward an animal that accomplishes that task, which can be counterproductive to its welfare.”57 Rather than inventing animal minds, this man is trying his best to ignore them.

			In contrast to the distance that some put between themselves and animals, others are more intimate with them—perhaps a little too intimate. Consider the case of Carlos Romero. He was in love. Romero was living in a small city in central Florida and finding it hard to meet people, but the thirty-one-year-old finally found someone to get excited about. They had been together only a couple of months, but their relationship was already quite physically advanced—they seemed to have a natural chemistry. Romero’s lover was named Doodles, a name befitting a twenty-one-month-old miniature donkey.

			Witnesses phoned the police after seeing Romero pressed against the back of Doodles with his pants down, and when he was questioned by detectives, Romero admitted that he and the donkey had had a half dozen sexual encounters and that he enjoyed the way her fur felt on his privates. In a later jailhouse interview with the Huffington Post, Romero admitted that he was never really a people person and preferred the company of animals, who were “usually there for you,” “100 percent honest,” and don’t “stab you in the back, give you diseases and lie to you.” He also demanded that Doodles be returned to him, since he had paid five hundred dollars for her.58

			Clearly Romero has had a tough time with human relationships, but so have many others who have resisted the charms of barnyard animals. What turned him to animals? There is no clear answer to how people develop these abnormal sexual preferences. One possibility is that people learn to feel sexually aroused by things that are exotic and different,59 and animals certainly fit that bill. However, given that few people engage in zoophilia—the technical term for sexual attraction to animals—this explanation seems insufficient. Another possibility is that it derives from childhood experiences in which sexual arousal is paired with animals and that this gets reinforced over time.60 A similar process occurs with animal fears: some people who have frightening childhood encounters with snakes and spiders develop full-blown phobias.61 But not all childhood experiences grow into adult obsessions, and so researchers are still searching for the reasons behind zoophilia.

			More relevant to our discussion are perceptions of zoophilia. In particular, why do people view human-animal love as so immoral? The explanation again lies with the mind-perception fault line that splits doers from feelers. Animals are seen as vulnerable feelers and not thinking doers, which means that they seem to suffer while lacking the agency to give informed consent—a key component of sexual relationships.62 But it isn’t clear that the animals actually suffer or that consent is actually important for animals. Animals never give informed consent, not even to the conspecifics they mate with in the wild, and we don’t imprison two donkeys for having consentless sex with each other. Instead we are all likely reacting to the relative imbalance between the minds of humans and those of the animals with whom they become intimate.

			Recall that our cognitive template of morality is dyadic, featuring an agent and a patient, an intentional thinking doer and a suffering vulnerable feeler. As we saw in chapter 1, the worst crimes pair powerful and invulnerable agents (high agency, low experience) with sensitive and vulnerable patients (low agency, high experience), explaining why it is immoral for a CEO to punch a little girl (but not vice versa). Zoophilia easily fits this template of wrongdoing, as vulnerable animals are powerless to stop us thinking humans from mistreating them—and so we react with outrage. This logic suggests that the way to make zoophilia seem less immoral* is to have trysts with animals perceived to have high agency and low experience. Sexual relations with dangerous and apparently unfeeling tiger sharks seem more forgivable than with helpless and sensitive miniature donkeys.

			Although most animals are typically ascribed less agency than humans, circumstances can conspire to make them appear capable of intention, planning, and even malice. In instances of severe suffering, animals can transform from hapless victims to calculating perpetrators. Consider an example from medieval France.

			It is the summer of 1457 in the small town of Savigny. A peasant woman goes to work in her garden, leaving her son in a cradle on the floor as she has done many times before. As she works, a sow slips through the door with her piglets in tow and hunts around for food. The sow discovers the baby and starts eating him, and by the time the mother realizes what is happening, there is little left but gristle and blood. The mother and the other townsfolk are understandably inconsolable, but rather than simply killing the sow, as we might do today, they decide to place the pig on trial.



					 						Figure 8: The Pig on Trial, as Illustrated in Robert Chambers’s Book of Days

						Through dyadic completion, we find a moral agent to blame.



			 				 			 			A judge is brought from the next town, and lawyers are appointed to represent the sow and her piglets. The defendant sits in a nearby pen as arguments are heard and witnesses are called, and eventually the judge rules. He decides that the sow is morally culpable of murder and should be sentenced to death for her crime. The piglets, however, due to their young age, are found not guilty, but the townsfolk are instructed to keep close watch over them, lest the trauma they witnessed warp their moral sensibilities. To carry out the sentence, the townsfolk build a gallows from which to hang the pig—at some considerable expense—as they would a human. The townsfolk gather round as the murderer is executed; finally, justice is done.63

			There are many medieval examples of animals on trial, including locusts legally condemned for crop destruction64 and a rooster sentenced to death for the gender-bending behavior of laying an egg (it was, in fact, just a misunderstood chicken).65

			Before you cast aspersions on the intelligence of the French peasantry, remember that they weren’t completely stupid; they realized that pigs, locusts, and poultry lacked mental sophistication. But there seems to be something special about witnessing injustice, whether the death of a child or the mass destruction of livelihood, that prompts people to find someone or something to blame. We call this urge dyadic completion.



					 						Figure 9: Kanizsa Triangle

						Just as visual completion compels people to see a white triangle in the Kanizsa triangle, dyadic completion compels people to see agents to blame for a suffering patient.



				 			 			As we saw in chapter 1, canonical examples of immorality have a complete dyad of agent plus patient: murder, theft, abuse, and fraud involve a thinking doer harming a vulnerable feeler. Sometimes, however, the enormity of injustice is so great that it trips our immorality detector, even without an obvious moral agent. An infant being eaten alive is so terrible that we can’t believe that it is simply bad luck. Instead we see it as an act of evil. This perception of injustice then feeds back and triggers our dyadic moral template, currently incomplete with only one mind instead of two—a suffering moral patient (in this case, the baby) with no moral agent to blame. To “complete” this dyad, our mind casts about for a thinking doer to slot into the agent role (in this case, the pig).

			As an analogy, consider the process of visual completion in the Kanizsa triangle, in which the presence of one triangle prompts the completion of a second triangle. No matter how you try, you cannot help but see that second triangle. Within the moral dyad, the first triangle is the presence of a moral patient, and the little Pac-Mans are feelings of injustice—both cues that compel you to see the white triangle (the moral agent).

			You might question whether the white triangle is actually there, but as with all things mind and morality, it is a matter of perception. Importantly, dyadic completion is satisfied only with a bona fide moral agent capable of intention, responsibility, and action, which explains why the peasants put the pig on trial, just as they would a human killer—a trial is a matter of moral responsibility, not just whether a bad act happened. One could also argue that the pig at least had more moral agency than the baby it ate, qualifying it as a relative moral agent. It is likely harder to blame a pig for the death of a powerful CEO (high agency, low experience) than for the death of a baby (low agency, high experience).

			Dyadic completion explains not only historical animal trials but also the blame we levy on the owners of dogs that bite children. It is not psychologically satisfying to simply acknowledge the unpredictability of animals with kids, so instead we seek out the most agentic mind available—and then typically sue it. The idea of dyadic completion is an important one, and it will resurface in future chapters as we explore campaigns against gay rights, conspiracy theories, and even the belief in God.

			Animals also feature in dyadic completion for good deeds. When Lassie saves a three-year-old from being hit by a speeding car, we ascribe to her goodness, insight, and wisdom.66 Similar attributions of moral agency are made to dogs that serve in the police force or military, such as Cairo, the Malinois* who accompanied Navy SEALs on their raid of Osama bin Laden’s compound. In the eyes of the military, Cairo is technically just a piece of military equipment, but in the eyes of his fellow SEALs, the average American, and even the president, Cairo is a hero. Criminals who kill K9 officers are punished much more harshly than those who kill other dogs; for example, South Carolinian Maurice McCreary was given five years in prison for shooting a police dog.67

			Even with dyadic completion, service animals are still technically a rung below humans. Contrary to some rumors, killing a police dog does not warrant the same punishment as killing a human police officer, and military dogs are not assigned a rank. Of course, that doesn’t stop us from mourning their loss as we might human heroes. When the German shepherd K9 officer Rocco was fatally stabbed while on duty in Pittsburgh, he was honored with a motorcade and a full funeral that featured more than a thousand attendees.68

			The thousands mourning a single dog seem light-years away from the cheering crowds at the bearbaiting, whom we met at the very beginning of this chapter, but both phenomena can be understood through mind perception. In the past, animals were seen as dumb beasts, whereas today some seem to care more about animals than even about other people. The tension between dumb beasts and best friends is a question we struggle with today, and it seems we often use unreliable cues to guide our decisions.

			People prioritize cuteness over intellect and humanness over problem-solving acumen, suggesting that mind perception may be more a matter of feeling than of reason. We may see with our eyes, but we seem to see animals’ minds with our hearts. When you find yourself talking to your dog while eating a dinner of steak, perhaps you’ll pause to reflect on the importance of the mind club—and whether your admission decisions are grounded in fact or merely wishful thinking.

			For our next cryptomind we move from the warm fur of animals to the cold embrace of machines.





Chapter 3


	 			THE MACHINE





If you have ever passionately kissed an inanimate object, you are not alone. Every year hundreds of people buy a RealDoll, a lifelike mannequin with fully functioning sexual parts. These dolls are typically female, and when you buy one—for approximately six thousand dollars—you can specify eye color, hair color, body type, and other less PG-13 features. In a sense, you can create your perfect lover. The only thing is that, no matter how much you love this perfect lover, she won’t love you back; adoring gazes and warm embraces are met with unblinking stares and room-temperature silicone. Relationships with human lovers take a time-honored progression, from dating and marriage to children and minivans, but relationships with RealDolls fail to progress at all. RealDolls can’t help pay the bills, make small talk with your colleagues at the office Christmas party, or hold you and whisper that everything will be okay.



					 						Figure 10: “Roxanne”

						A RealDoll with Face #11.



				 			 			For those accustomed to living lovers, relationships with RealDolls seem no more fulfilling than relationships with plywood or Tupperware. But for those who own RealDolls the relationship does seem satisfying, going beyond physical needs to emotional intimacy. One RealDoll aficionado, nicknamed “Davecat,” describes his relationship with “Shi-chan,” a statuesque brunette with green eyes and a removable tongue, manufactured by Abyss Creations: “When she first came into my life, it was sex, sex, sex, sex, sex, and now it’s just tapered off to where we’re just there for each other. We’re always there for each other.”1 You may wonder how Davecat finds it satisfying to have Shi-chan “there for him” when Shi-chan lacks the mind necessary to love him back. The truth, however, is that Shi-chan does have a mind, because Davecat perceives it—such is the power of mind perception.

			RealDolls may seem like a strange place to start in a chapter on machines, but they wonderfully exemplify the theme of this chapter: human creations as cryptominds. Unlike animals, which are creations of nature, machines such as robots, computers, and iPhones are all products of our own minds. Just as an artist might stare at her own art and divine new truths about her psyche, so too can we examine our reactions to mechanical creations to learn about mind perception and human needs.

			The first thing we can learn from RealDolls is that people don’t like to be lonely. Even though Davecat realizes that Shi-chan is not alive, he says that she makes the “difference between being alone, and being lonely.” Loneliness is an oppressive, gnawing experience, often described as painful.2 In prisons, inmates dread solitary confinement above all else, and many believe it qualifies as torture. In 2012 the Center for Constitutional Rights filed suit against the state of California for using solitary confinement in its prisons, claiming that the practice violates the Eighth Amendment, which guarantees protection from cruel and unusual punishment.

			The power of loneliness stems from the evolutionary fact that humans are social creatures who depend on others for survival.3 People who lack a social support network are more likely to die from heart disease and cancer,4 and most of us would be dead if left alone in the forest for a month. Even if we could survive as a lone human, few of us would want to. Imagine being the last woman or man on Earth. Sure, you could drive recklessly and loot stores, but without someone in the passenger seat to share the thrill of speeding and the taste of illicit Twinkies, what’s the point?

			Our need to feel social connection explains why people often embellish their relationships with other people. Every time you think of celebrities as close friends or imagine that you and your hunky mail carrier have a deep personal connection, you are creating what are called “parasocial relationships.” Unlike normal two-sided relationships, parasocial relationships are felt by only one person—but to that one person they are undoubtedly real, even when they involve characters on TV. Loneliness makes people imagine a loving bond with other minds, and this love can make even imaginary minds real.

			To test this “love makes minds real” effect, psychologists Wendi Gardner and Megan Knowles sat participants in front of a monitor that showed either their favorite television character—with whom participants reported a close personal connection—or another random (and unloved) television character. The “realness” of the character’s mind was tested via “social facilitation” as participants copied a list of words with either their dominant or nondominant hand.

			“Social facilitation” is the technical term for what happens when you do something in front of real people, like give a speech or play sports. Decades of research has shown that social situations increase performance on well-practiced tasks and decrease performance on novel tasks, which explains why sports rookies choke under pressure but veterans rise to the challenge. In this study the well-practiced task was copying words with the dominant hand, and the novel task was copying words with the nondominant hand. As the researchers predicted, social facilitation was found when participants sat in front of their favorite television character, becoming faster at dominant-hand copying and slower at nondominant-hand copying. People who had strong emotional connections with their favorite characters unconsciously performed as if these characters were real people.5

			That loneliness can compel us to see imaginary characters as members of the mind club may not be surprising. After all, they are played by real people who ostensibly have real minds. But loneliness can also make us see minds in mere objects. When Tom Hanks’s character in Cast Away finds himself alone on a desert island, he befriends a kindly volleyball named Wilson to cope with the isolation. Over the course of the movie, Hanks’s character laughs and cries with Wilson, just as he would with a real person. In an empirical test of this idea, psychologists Nick Epley and Adam Waytz asked people to rate both their loneliness and the minds of mechanical devices that included Clocky (a self-propelled alarm clock that rolls away from the lazy sleeper) and Pillow Mate (a human-shaped pillow programmed to hug). As predicted, lonelier people saw these machines as possessing more mind, including intentions, consciousness, emotions, and free will.6



					 						Figure 11: Clocky

						The lonelier you are, the more mind you perceive in Clocky, the alarm clock that runs away from you.



				 			 			If loneliness makes people see free will in alarm clocks, it’s no surprise that those without human relationships see RealDolls as members of the mind club.7 As we saw in the previous chapter, a humanlike appearance compels us to see mind, and Shi-chan certainly looks human. Of course, dolls can’t love you back, but they also can’t betray or hurt you—a sentiment also expressed by donkey-loving Carlos Romero in the previous chapter. As one doll owner says, “All the lies, and all the deceit, and all the times I’ve been used—it’ll never happen again.”8

			Not only do we give mind to machines that meet our social needs, but we also ascribe mind when they seem to need us. Perhaps you remember the Tamagotchi craze that swept through schools in the late 1990s. This little device with an LCD screen was an electronic pet that required constant attention and care. You had to feed it when it was “hungry,” clean up after it “pooped,” and turn off the lights when it was “sleepy.” Failure to do these things could not only result in the death of the Tamagotchi but could also produce a deranged and poorly behaved pet, much like a feral child. Because the Tamagotchi was sensitive to harm (if only electronically), it pulled at people’s heartstrings. Just as vulnerable animals are perceived to have minds, so too are apparently vulnerable machines.

			Seeing mind in machines not only makes us feel warm and fuzzy but also gives us a sense of control over their behavior. We understand that human behavior is driven by thoughts and experiences—people cry because they are sad and BASE jump from skyscrapers because they are crazy—and so we think of machines’ behavior as driven by thoughts and experiences too. Think of when you are confronted with a malfunctioning piece of technology, like a hiccupping laptop. Your first impulse isn’t to think, “Its capacitors have overtaxed p-n junctions,” but instead to think, “It gets angry when too many programs are open.” Likewise, when we are hoping that our car will start on winter mornings, we don’t think about the complex interaction of carburetor and temperature but instead think of our car as stubborn or unhappy in the cold—and beg it to not make us late for work.

			As these examples suggest, the tendency to see mind in technology occurs primarily when it disobeys our desires.9 When machines function smoothly, we feel in control, but when they misbehave, we see mind to help us understand. This is also true with people. When your toddler is being a good kid, you don’t think hard about why that’s the case. But when he’s screaming and flinging his dinner around a French restaurant, you immediately try very hard to figure out his motivations and thoughts on the matter. People are more likely to think of their old Chevy truck as being in the mind club than their brand-new Audi, despite the Audi’s fancy technology. The Audi does everything exactly as it should—and so is seen as lacking mind—but that old “girl” needs encouragement, cajoling, and sometimes just a sensitive ear to listen to her.

			Psychologist Carey Morewedge calls this phenomenon a negativity bias in mind perception—negative events prompt mind perception more than positive events. To experimentally demonstrate this effect, he had participants play some “ultimatum games,” in which one person offers a split of money between themselves and someone else, and the other person decides whether to accept the split. If the split is accepted, everyone gets their share—however fair or unfair—but if the split is rejected, then no one gets any money.

			For example, imagine Bonnie gets ten dollars to split between herself and Clyde. Bonnie offers a split of six dollars to her and four to Clyde, and now Clyde has to decide whether to accept the split or reject it. If Clyde accepts it, then they each receive their money, but if Clyde rejects it, then no one gets any money. Rationally, it always makes sense to accept any split—even if you are offered only a penny—since some money is better than no money, but feelings of fairness and spite frequently lead people to reject lopsided offers.

			In Morewedge’s study participants played three ultimatum games with three different partners, who (the participants were told) could be all people, all computers, or some combination of the two. After participants were presented with the proposed split from their partner, he asked them to guess whether their partner was a computer or a person.10 In truth, the partner was always a computer, but participants typically believed they were playing with people when the situation was negative. When the offer was fair or generous, they were more than happy to think it was a mindless machine, but when the offer was unfair, they quickly ascribed intention behind it, believing it to result from the cruel calculations of another person. As we saw in the previous chapter, bad outcomes lead people to search for an agent to blame for mistreatment—a phenomenon called dyadic completion. The negativity bias in mind perception can actually be explained as part of dyadic completion, as people search for an agentic mind to take the blame when they feel vulnerable and exploited.

			In addition to the motivations of understanding and social connection, people often perceive mind in machines because of anthropomorphism, the tendency to treat something as human. As we explored in the previous chapter, people are generally anthropocentric, seeing everything from the perspective of humans. More technically, we have “schemas” for many things in life, scripts or outlines for how things should go. The schema for a date involves meeting someone at a restaurant, the schema for an exam involves sitting quietly in a row of desks, and the schema for interacting with a new entity—like a machine—is to treat it as a human.

			We often don’t realize when we’re anthropomorphizing because our schemas are unconscious, but it can lead to curious effects with machines. In a series of studies, Clifford Nass and Youngme Moon found that participants treated computers as if they had gender and ethnicity, just like humans. Participants were also polite to these computers. When the computer asked how it was performing, people were unfailingly nice, even when it was actually performing poorly. But just as with humans, this politeness held only when participants were dealing with the computer “face to face.” They were more than happy to bad-mouth one computer to a different computer.11

			Although we are typically polite to machines, this warm facade can quickly fade. The mind survey in chapter 1 revealed that machines are generally seen as lacking experience—and vulnerability—and so it is easy to be cruel to them. When Microsoft introduced a little lifelike paper clip (cleverly nicknamed “Clippy”) in its Office programs, people played along by ascribing it intentions—but hateful ones. Similarly, when navigating the phone systems of banks or airlines, our simple yeses and nos to the disembodied computer voice quickly become “Connect me to a real person!” or a litany of swear words. Beyond anecdotes, the British researchers Antonella De Angeli and Rollo Carpenter analyzed people’s conversations with the online chatbot Jabberwacky, a sophisticated computer program capable of basic communication.12 Their database revealed hundreds of examples of computer abuse, ranging from bodily threat to sexual harassment.* Consider this excerpt:


User: What is your address?

			Jabberwacky: I don’t think I’ll tell you. You’d kill me if I told you. Wouldn’t you!

			User: Yes I would.

			Jabberwacky: What is your favourite food?

			User: I WILL KILL YOU! I WILL HUNT YOU DOWN!!!

			Jabberwacky: Please don’t. . . . I really have to leave.

			User: I WILL KILL YOU!

			Companies try to circumvent humanity’s penchant for machine cruelty by making their technological agents more likable. IKEA’s Web site once had an automated helper named Anna who was cheerfully polite as she helped you find the latest in Swedish furniture. Her niceness had limits, however, as she would not respond to aggressive questions about why the Svaglen broke into a million particle-board pieces or why the Muurfben didn’t come with an Allen key.

			Agents like Anna—or the iPhone’s Siri—often incur our wrath because computers exceed humans in so many other ways that we expect them to be capable in all ways. Many machines are better at thinking than people are, and because we tend to think of agency as an entire cluster of capacities, we wonder how a machine that can do millions of calculations per second can fail to book us on the last flight out of New York. It also doesn’t help that we see mind in machines when we are confused and searching for control, which happen to be the very times we are short-tempered and spiteful. Whether you’re cruel or kind to automated agents, ascribing them mind is an inevitable consequence of trying to understand and control the world around us.

			Setting aside our general tendency for anthropomorphism, we seem to have two broad motivations for perceiving mind: feeling lonely and craving control. In another demonstration of the great fault line between the two kinds of perceived minds, each of these motivations maps onto primarily one dimension of mind perception. When we feel lonely, we see experience in people and pets—and also machines—which seem to love and care for us and need our love and care in return. On the other hand, when we seek control, we see agency in entities in order to predict and understand their behavior.13 But even if you’re not lonely or confused, you likely need machines more than you think—especially given our limited memories.

			You may not realize it, but your memories are distributed across many sources, including notes, books, people, and machines. To remember a doctor’s appointment you put a Post-it note on the fridge, to make banana bread you use a cookbook to jog your memory, and to remember Christmas 2007 you look back in a photo album. This distribution of memory is especially obvious in our interactions with other people. You may not know much about cars, but you have a friend who knows by heart the engine displacement of a Maserati and how to replace a head gasket while blindfolded. This means that you are free to ignore all car-related facts as long as you can bring her along to the mechanic. The key is that you don’t need to remember the “what” of something (e.g., the difference between fixed and floating brake calipers) as long as you can remember the “who”—the person who knows it (e.g., Tina the gearhead).

			This phenomenon is called transactive memory,14 and spouses use it all the time. One person may take responsibility for knowing everything about gardening, while the other may know everything about cooking. One person remembers the birthdays of the extended family, whereas the other remembers to take the car in for regular maintenance. Like the distribution of labor that fueled the Industrial Revolution, this distribution of memory makes economic sense. Why remember everything half as well when you can remember half the things twice as well?

			In today’s networked society, our minds are distributed among not just books and people but also technology.15 How many phone numbers do you know off the top of your head? One dozen, maybe two? Perhaps not even that many. Before cell phones (but after dinosaurs), you could commit only ten numbers to speed dial, and the rest you had to either remember or store in your Rolodex. Not only can modern cell phones remember every phone number you’ll ever need, but a single smartphone has enough memory to record every phone number in the world. The amazing memories of machines mean that you probably don’t even try to remember phone numbers, spelling disaster if you ever find yourself stranded without your phone.

			Machines not only have more memory capacity than people or books but also circumvent the necessity of knowing which person or book contains which piece of information. With a set of books you need the equivalent of a card catalog, and with a group of friends you have to remember which person knows about cars, or gardening, or French cooking. Search engines have made concerns about indexing obsolete. If you can find everything just by typing something into Google, then you really only need to know one rule: “if unknown, search Google.”

			Our research suggests that people do indeed use search engines as an intellectual crutch. Together with Betsy Sparrow, we gave participants trivia questions, both easy (e.g., “Who is the president of America?”) and challenging (e.g., “Who is the president of Nicaragua?”). After each question participants were asked to label the color of text in which different company names were written. For example, “Google” might be written in blue, and “Nike” might be written in red. Known as the Stroop task, this procedure relies on the idea that people are slow to label the colors of words that capture their attention, because they focus more on the meaning of the word than on its color.

			As we expected, challenging questions led people to label the color of Internet-related companies (e.g., Google or Yahoo!) more slowly, suggesting that people were yearning after all-knowing search engines when answers evaded them.16 A follow-up study found that people were also happy to take credit for the knowledge of Google. When people answered challenging questions with the help of Google, they felt much smarter, believing that they could answer questions correctly even without Google’s help. (They couldn’t.)

			So the next time someone asks you whether you’ve lost your mind, do a brief check for your spouse and—most important—make sure your wireless connection is on. As long as you have Google, you’ll still have some mind, and it might only be a matter of time until our minds become literally fused with computers. One group of scientists has already patented microchips that can be buried within your eyes, and researchers at the University of Washington have harnessed the Internet to control one person’s hand movements with another person’s brain signals.17

			This melding of mind and machine might make us more efficient, but some fear that the computers cannot be trusted and—if left to their own devices—might realize that humans are unnecessary. In the movie The Terminator the supercomputer Skynet suddenly becomes sentient and immediately launches all the world’s nuclear missiles.18 In the resulting Armageddon, humans are all but wiped out, and the remaining few are hunted by lethal cyborgs. Such an apocalypse may seem far-fetched, but the Internet already links together all of the world’s computers, and all we need is one computer to develop the power to think for itself. Impossible? Ray Kurzweil thinks not.

			Ray Kurzweil is a futurist, which means that he makes predictions about the future. His most notable prediction is about “the singularity,” in which computers become able to think, especially about themselves.19 To understand the singularity we need to discuss another futurist named Gordon Moore, who was a cofounder of Intel, the microchip company. Based on what Moore saw while developing microchips, he theorized that computing power would double roughly every two years.20 For the past forty years, “Moore’s law” has held true; if you compared a chip made in 2010 with one made in 1970, it would be 220 (or 1,048,576) times more powerful. This explains why operations that used to take weeks on a computer can now be done in a matter of seconds, and why your friend’s new iPhone seems so much better than your once-cutting-edge BlackBerry.

			Kurzweil pondered this increasing computing power and wondered if this straight line of progress could be turned into an upward spiral in which computers could increase their own computing power. This may not seem like that big of an idea, but it’s potentially world changing, because it describes a positive feedback cycle—an operation that (1) acts to increase something and (2) takes its own output as an input. The classic positive feedback cycle is a microphone (input) connected to an amplifier (operation) held next to a speaker (output). In any speaker there’s always a little buzz, but it’s typically inaudible. However, if you hold a microphone to a speaker, it will pick up the buzz, which the amplifier increases before relaying it to the speaker. The microphone then picks up this louder buzz, which the amplifier increases even more before relaying it again to the speaker. The microphone then picks up this even louder buzz, and on and on, until you quickly hear an ear-splitting shriek.

			Along the same lines, if a computer is intelligent enough to increase its own intelligence, it can become more intelligent, allowing it to become even more intelligent, and so on. The feedback cycle can quickly carry on to infinity—and quickly turn humans from planet Earth’s most dominant life form to fleshy slaves. This is a terrifying possibility for us, but who could blame machines—we saw just how cruel and callous we can be to them in conversation.

			Kurzweil, for his part, is banking on the idea that once computers become all-powerful, they will be benevolent. He expects to be able to upload his consciousness into a computer and live immortally in the Internet, in harmony with machines. Of course, anyone who has spent time with a three-year-old understands that our creations often don’t go as planned, as trips to the mall often end in fierce tantrums and the attempted destruction of entire shopping aisles. Who knows what would happen with a tantrum-throwing superagent in control of air-traffic systems; just the idea of such sentient technology may give you the creeps.

			The threat of self-aware and all-powerful computers may seem to be a problem of the future, but people have long been confronted with lifelike machines—and worried about whether they belonged in the mind club. From 1770 to the mid-1800s, an automaton known as the Turk toured Europe and the Americas, beating the best minds of the time (including Ben Franklin) at chess, before it was revealed that the machine was in fact being controlled by a human chess master hidden inside.



					 						Figure 12: The Mechanical Turk

						An early machine cryptomind.



				 			 			In another purported case the famous philosopher René Descartes, distraught at the loss of his daughter, made a mechanical version of her, complete with arm and head motions, and took her on a long sea voyage.21 Although she was stored in a crate belowdecks, one of the deckhands discovered her and quickly told others about this strange humanlike robot. The superstitious crew was so put off by her eerie appearance and jerky motions that they threw her overboard into the ocean, leaving Descartes to cope with his daughter’s loss a second time.

			Today we seem to have come a long way from the Frankenstein-like scenario of pitchfork-wielding townspeople burning the new and different. People don’t seem to mind when robots clean their floors, build their cars, administer their medication, or perform their surgery.22 These examples, however, are all agency-related examples of thinking and doing; there seems to be something very different about a robot that can sense and feel. In robots we seem to be hesitant to combine agency with experience, to make a human machine.

			Could a robot ever be human? From one perspective humans are simply a sophisticated collection of on/off switches (i.e., neurons), and it should theoretically be possible to mimic our minds with silicon transistors instead of fleshy cells. In practice the sheer complexity of our brains makes it extremely difficult to duplicate them, but scientists suggest that nothing in principle separates us from robots.23 Intuitively this argument may seem hard to accept because of an apparent sharp line between us (humans) and them (robots). Call it whatever you like—a soul, an essence, or just “humanity”—but it seems impossible to create a fully human machine. Corporations may be able to mass-produce circuit boards, but how could they mass-produce a soul? We will investigate the concept of the soul more deeply in chapter 8 on the dead, but suffice it to say souls are difficult to detect.

			The real question for the mind club is whether a sufficiently sophisticated robot—one that looks and acts human—is at least close enough to human. Imagine you are at a dinner party, seated next to a middle-aged novelist who is telling you about his latest book. It’s historical fiction, focusing on one family’s struggle in Depression-era America as a metaphor for the struggles of modern adulthood. He says it will win a Pulitzer if the committee has any sense. You’re just about to politely reply that it sounds fascinating when you notice something that actually is fascinating—a collection of LEDs flashing from his scalp. When you ask him what they are, he responds by pushing a button next to his ear, revealing the mass of circuit boards in his head. Then he asks if you’re single and if you want to go home with him after dinner.

			He may be pedantic and narcissistic, but is he human? Alan Turing would say yes. As we mentioned in chapter 1, Alan Turing was a famous mathematician who not only helped British intelligence crack Nazi codes in World War II but also developed a test for a kind of humanness.24 Turing thought that the best test of human intelligence was whether something could converse just like a person. In this case he would suggest that our novelist friend, if not human, at least had a human mind. The Turing test is called a functional test of humanness, saying that “a human is as human does.” Research by philosophers suggests that people do sometimes use functionalist concerns when perceiving mind,25 believing that if something talks like a human, then it is a human.

			The Turing test has so powerfully captured the imaginations of computer scientists that they conduct a competition every year in which programmers try to fool humans with their computer creations. The competition is actually called the Loebner Prize in honor of Hugh Loebner, who in 1990 agreed to provide the funding for an annual prize of $100,000 and a gold medal, both awarded to the researcher who makes the most human-minded computer. For an interactive demonstration of these humanlike computer programs, check out the chatbots Cleverbot and Jabberwacky (the recipient of abuse we met earlier in the chapter). A few seconds of conversation reveals that these programs have a way to go before becoming convincing, but the task of writing them is very hard. Not only do computers have to be sophisticated at language, but they also have to have enough shared knowledge of culture, including literature, movies, history, and current events.

			Of course, even the requirement of cultural knowledge is not insurmountable, as demonstrated by Watson, a computer programmed by IBM that played a three-day Jeopardy tournament against Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings. Jennings is the winningest human in the game show’s history, having won seventy-four games in a row, but in a stunning demonstration of machine prowess Watson crushed both him and Rutter. After the three days the tally was Rutter with $21,600, Jennings with $24,000, and Watson with $77,147. Jennings appeared to embrace the power of computers and his new irrelevance, writing “I, for one, welcome our new computer overlords” as one of his final Jeopardy responses. A similar fate befell chess grandmaster Garry Kasparov in a 1997 tournament when he lost at the “hands” of IBM’s Deep Blue.* The scope of computers appears to be ever expanding, but they still cannot beat the Turing test—at least not yet.

			Passing the Turing test may be difficult when we’re actively evaluating entities for machineness, but we seldom do this in real life. If you were to say, “That cashier seemed nice enough, but I just can’t shake the feeling that she’s a robot,” your friends would think you were paranoid. We generally go through life thinking that others are members of the mind club, and it’s only extreme events—like seeing a head full of circuit boards—that make us revise that assumption. This means that the task of machines is made even easier by the presence of social schemas, which we introduced earlier in our discussion of why we are polite to computers. These schemas set clear scripts about how interactions should go, and as long as they are followed, you would never think about evaluating someone else for humanness.

			Consider the very clear script of drive-through fast food—it’s a safe bet that the order could be taken by a machine in 99 percent of cases. Or consider the robot psychotherapist Eliza, programmed between 1964 and 1966.26 As therapists usually let their clients talk—and ask only enough questions to keep them talking—people could speak to Eliza for some time before realizing “she” wasn’t human. You could probably put your mother on the phone with Eliza and be just fine. “How does that make you feel? Uh-huh. Oh, right. That’s terrible. And how do you feel about that?” Of course, it gets tougher in the fullness of human interaction, but there are many scripts, including ones for interviewing, arguing, and even dating.

			Take the example of Robert Epstein, who in 2006 thought that he’d try online dating. This was before it was popular and before users had complex profiles and pictures galore. Early adopters would put up a simple profile of mostly text and then e-mail each other back and forth. On one Web site, Epstein met a Russian girl named Svetlana. Over the course of a few months they discussed their feelings, their romantic hopes, and their future together. From the start Epstein was enamored with Svetlana, but over time he became suspicious—she rarely spoke about her life in Russia, instead just asking him questions and writing generic romantic sentiments. When he did a more rigorous Turing-style test to ferret out her humanness, Svetlana failed. He had been falling in love with a bot.27

			Of course, you might think that even if Svetlana had completely succeeded, there was still the matter of meeting up in person. If Epstein had flown to Russia for a surprise visit, he wouldn’t have seen a tall, blond Slavic woman, but instead a grungy gray box and an old CRT monitor. How close are we to making a human-looking robot? Closer than you think, but before we get there, we first have to overcome one mountain—or valley.

			Animated movies have been around for a century, but animation has come a long way from Steamboat Willie, the first Mickey Mouse film, released in 1928. For one thing, films today feature not only color but also 3-D animation and computer-generated effects. With the latest in technology, programmers can make animated characters look almost fully human. “Almost” is an important qualifier. Human is great, but almost human is not. When Warner Bros. released The Polar Express—a Christmas feature with an almost-human animated Tom Hanks—people were unnerved and the movie flopped. The animated Tom Hanks was certainly based on the actor, and it had the voice of the actor, but its skin was a little too gray, its lips not quite expressive. It was creepy.



					 						Figure 13: The Uncanny Valley

						The least liked items are those that are similar to human, while maintaining an eerie nonhumanness.

						M. MORI, K. F. MACDORMAN, AND N. KAGEKI, “THE UNCANNY VALLEY” (FROM THE FIELD), ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION MAGAZINE, IEEE 19 (2012), 98–100. REPRINTED WITH PERMISSION.



				 			 			More technically, the appearance of Hank’s character fell into the uncanny valley, the no-man’s-land between human and nonhuman. The uncanny valley was first charted in 1970 by Masahiro Mori, a Japanese robotics engineer who was interested in the appearance of robots.28 He predicted that people would like robots when they looked more lifelike, but at some point they would become too lifelike and people would stop liking them. He also predicted that once they looked completely human, people would start liking them again. It is this dip in liking that he labeled the uncanny valley—when something is almost but not quite human.

			Since Mori proposed the uncanny valley, multiple studies have confirmed its existence. People enjoy both cute robot faces and real human faces, but when the two are fused together to make an intermediate human/robot face, liking drops steeply.29 Monkeys also detect the uncanny valley, as they prefer real monkey faces and highly caricatured monkey faces more than intermediate real/not-real monkey faces.30 Of course, monkeys can’t tell you why they don’t like these hybrid faces, but many researchers have ideas about why the uncanny valley occurs.

			One idea behind the uncanny valley is that people like clear lines between any two categories, including human and robot. In this view, a humanlike robot is unnerving because we don’t know whether to call it human and ask for a hug or call it robot and ask it to crush a soda can in its metallic grip.31 If this is true, then blurring any category lines should be unsettling, even mundane categories such as types of snack foods. However, people happily purchase Pretzel Crisps (a combination of pretzels and chips), suggesting that there is something special about the categories of “living” and “nonliving.”32



					 						Figure 14: An Almost-Human Robot

						A designer at Human Emulation Robotics applies lipstick to a mechanical female. Such robots are creepy because of misplaced perceptions of experience.



				 			 			Why is the living/nonliving category boundary so unique? One possibility is that evolution has endowed us with clear expectations of what living things should look like, and the gray skin and dead eyes of almost-humans conflict with these expectations. For example, we generally expect living creatures to have faces, which is why the star-nosed mole—which lacks conventional facial features—is so unsettling. (See figure 15.)

			In a milder form, expectations about living entities may underlie the feelings we get when we meet someone with an extra finger or with a bizarre double joint. Although people who can touch their ear to their tailbone are unsettling, the uncanniness of humanlike robots is even deeper; it extends beyond specific features to the central question of whether machines are living or not.*33 Because of the tight link between being alive and having a mind, we wondered if the uncanniness of humanlike robots revolved around mind perception.



					 						Figure 15: The Star-Nosed Mole

						When something violates our fundamental expectations (i.e., animals should have faces), the result is unsettling.



				 			 			Specifically, we predicted that humanoid robots are unnerving because their humanlike appearance implies a humanlike mind, which people are unwilling to give them. Although we are happy to see mind in animals that look and act human, the presence of a mind in an otherwise inanimate object may be an unsettling mismatch, like a toddler smoking. But what kind of mind is unsettling in robots—agency or experience? The mind survey provides a hint. Human minds are perceived to possess both agency and experience, but robots are typically ascribed only agency, suggesting that experience is off-limits to robots.

			Except for evil, world-dominating science-fiction robots, people accept the idea of agentic robots that make cars, clean houses, control traffic lights, and predict economic turmoil. In contrast, it’s hard to imagine robots feeling anything. It’s not for nothing that we use the word “robotic” to refer to someone who goes through life without feeling much. This reasoning implies that humanoid robots are unsettling when their appearance leads us to infer the capacity for experience. Feeling is for the living only; robots need not apply. We will happily admit humans and animals to the experience section of the mind club, but machines can join only the agency section.

			To examine the role of experience in creating the uncanny valley, we had participants view one of two videos of a humanoid robot. One video was filmed from behind the robot, so that only wires and circuit boards were visible. The second was filmed from the front, showing the robot’s human face. Participants then rated their feeling of uncanniness and the robot’s ability to think and act (i.e., agency) and sense and feel (i.e., experience). As predicted, the humanlike robot was more disturbing, and this effect was explained by the fact that people saw it as more capable of experience.34 It seems that eyes and mouth conveyed an inappropriately elevated capacity for experience.35

			If perceptions of experience are the driving force behind the uncanny valley, then robots with the capacity to feel should be unsettling even without a human face. We tested and confirmed this prediction experimentally, revealing that people were unnerved by even the idea of a feeling machine.36 In a related study, philosophers Justin Sytsma and Edouard Machery asked people whether a robot could sense a variety of smells.37 People had no problem saying that a machine could sense the chemical isoamyl acetate, but they were hesitant to give the robot the ability to smell bananas or vomit because these are inherently emotional smells.



					 						Figure 16: The Experience Gap

						More accurately, the uncanny valley should be called an “experience gap”—people find creepy both machines with experience and humans without experience.



				 			 			These studies suggest that we are happy to have a robot work in our factories, as long as it doesn’t fall in love with our daughter. If experience is completely off-limits to machines, it also suggests a different understanding of the uncanny valley from the figure first drawn by Mori. In that original figure, sufficiently humanlike robots rose out of the uncanny valley to again become liked. However, if we fundamentally expect robots to lack experience—regardless of their appearance—then even fully human-looking robots should be seen as unsettling if they convey emotions. Instead of an uncanny valley, this would suggest an “experience gap,”38 which can never be overcome as long as you are still classified as a machine.

			Of course, as with any scientific rule, there often seem to be counterexamples, and people frequently mention Data from Star Trek: The Next Generation and Scarlett Johansson’s character from the movie Her, as both seem to be machines with full experience. In fact, neither of these cases refutes the experience gap because they are not fully human robots but instead fully human humans. Data is actually Brent Spiner with lots of makeup, and we have to consciously remind ourselves that the character is a robot. As for Her, audiences are willing to empathize with a man who falls in love with an operating system, but likely only because the operating system has the voice of Scarlett Johansson, an actress renowned for her sensuality. If the operating system were voiced by the robotic voice of Siri or even the human voice of Judi Dench, it wouldn’t have worked. In fact, the movie was originally shot with Samantha Morton as the voice of the operating system, before director Spike Jonze replaced her with the high-experience Johansson.

			Just as robots with experience are unnerving, the experience gap explains why humans without experience are disturbing. When you look into the eyes of a psychopath and see nothing but cold calculation, it’s hard to suppress the shiver up your spine. Even more unnerving than the unfeeling stare of a killer is a complete lack of conscious experience—a person with no inner life at all, no sensations or feelings. We have encountered these people elsewhere—they are the zombies39 that we accused your mother of being in chapter 1, and our experiments reveal that people find the very idea of such human zombies just as unsettling as humanlike robots.40

			The experience gap touches on a deep question about what dimension of mind perception is essential to our understanding of humanity. Through Hamlet, Shakespeare suggested that the essence of humanity was agency, the capacity to think, reason, and do:


What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an Angel! In apprehension how like a god!41

			Conversely, George Orwell believed that the essence of humanity was experience, the capacity to feel and suffer:


The essence of being human is that one does not seek perfection, that one is sometimes willing to commit sins for the sake of loyalty . . . and that one is prepared in the end to be defeated and broken up by life, which is the inevitable price of fastening one’s love upon other human individuals.42

			The experience gap suggests that Orwell was right, such that people fundamentally expect other people to have experience and fundamentally expect machines to lack experience.43

			There is a sneaky way to bridge the experience gap, however. The trick is to design machines that look less human but act so human that we never pause to consider whether they are robots. No one is better at making robot experience seem natural than Rodney Brooks, Cynthia Breazeal, and the other creative computer scientists of the MIT Media Lab.



					 						Figure 17: Kismet

						The robot Kismet, now on display at the MIT Museum in Cambridge, MA.



				 			 			Unlike many other roboticists, the folks at MIT didn’t strive to create a robot that looked like a human adult or could converse like a human adult. Instead they sought to make a robot—which they named “Kismet”—with the emotional capacity of a young child, focusing on three specific goals.44 First, they wanted their robot to look like a mind, with sensors and effectors—those cues to mind perception we saw in chapter 2 on animals. This didn’t mean giving the robot an accurate (and creepy) human face but instead giving it an exaggerated human face that emphasizes key expressive features such as eyes, lips, and ears.45 Second, they wanted their robot to express its mind, dynamically coordinating its facial features to convey feelings of happiness (widening eyes, smiling), sadness (drooping ears and eyes), and many other experience-related states. Third, they wanted their robot to perceive mind, understand the mental states of its partners, and respond accordingly. This is the most complicated element of these impressive robots and leaps the gap from preprogrammed movements to genuine conversations between you and the robot.

			Beyond all the papers, patents, and technological advances achieved by the MIT team, perhaps the best indicator of their success is the fact that people felt emotions right along with the robot: when Kismet got happy or sad, so too did people interacting with it.* People were so emotionally engaged that they never stopped to think whether Kismet actually had emotions, suggesting that—out of all robots—this sociable robot comes the closest to passing the Turing test. Of course, people can tell that it is a robot, but they treat it like a human child, and actions speak louder than words. Kismet and other sociable robots seem to have crossed the robot Rubicon and are ascribed not only agency but also experience. Treating robots as vulnerable feelers raises the question of whether they are true moral patients—do robots deserve moral rights?

			Many of us have given money to the SPCA—the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals—but have you ever given money to the SPCR? Founded in 1999, the mission of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Robots is to “raise the awareness of the general public about some of the ethical and moral issues surrounding created intelligence.” Moral rights for robots? Are they serious? Their answer: “The SPCR is, and will continue to be, exactly as serious as robots are sentient.” In other words, when robots come to have their own minds, the SPCR will seek to grant those minds moral rights. This whole idea may sound preposterous, but not too long ago people would have thought the mission of the SPCA to be equally preposterous, as we saw in chapter 2 with the “recreation” of bearbaiting.

			It is actually not hard to empathize with robots—all one needs are external cues of suffering. In one thought-provoking short story, Terrel Miedaner describes a man who tries to destroy a robot with a hammer.46 The robot runs away and tries to hide, and when the man eventually connects with the hammer, the robot flips over, “whimpers,” and “bleeds” red lubricating fluid. The man knows that it’s “just a robot,” but the final blow still feels like murder. This is the crux of the mystery surrounding the mind club: even though we consciously “know” an entity lacks experience, external cues—and the ultimate uncertainty—makes us question ourselves.

			Bringing this idea into the lab, Christoph Bartneck, a roboticist in New Zealand, asked subjects to turn off—to “kill”—a robot. As people approached it, the robot began to plead for its life, and although they knew that it was just programmed to beg, still they hesitated. One woman had to steel herself to do the dirty deed, repeating, “I will switch you off. I will switch you off.” Even then she balked when the robot said, “Please. You can decide to keep me switched on. Please.”47

			Likewise, it isn’t easy for the comrades of military robots to let them go. You might expect soldiers to treat combat robots as “just machines,” but the behavior of marines on duty in Iraq suggests otherwise. When their MARCbot—a robot designed to find and detonate explosives—was destroyed, the soldiers gave it a full funeral, complete with a twenty-one-gun salute.48 Just like the military dogs we encountered in the last chapter, people seem to give mind to machines that do heroic deeds, even if the machines themselves aren’t aware of their heroism.

			Questions of robot moral patiency are mirrored by questions of robot moral agency. Robots may be perceived as thinking doers, but is that sufficient for earning moral responsibility? What do we do when a robot kills a person? This question is sharpest when it concerns drones, those sky-patrolling machines armed with missiles. Currently drones are fully controlled via satellite by a pilot, so when they kill civilians, we can blame the human mind who pulled the trigger. But what happens when the robot comes to possess enough agency to be self-directed? Perhaps we could just get rid of bad robots, euthanizing them as we do bad dogs. Eventually we might ponder robot prisons in which they sit in a cell for dozens—or hundreds—of years and think about their actions.

			Rather than focus on robot retribution, people have mostly thought about how to make machines moral in the first place. Most famously, Isaac Asimov49 imagined three rules of robots, which futuristic robots would be compelled to follow. The first was to never harm humans (or through inaction allow a human to come to harm). The second was to always obey humans. The third was to try to protect itself. These three laws were not equal, however, as earlier laws always took precedent over later laws. This means that a robot told to kill someone for you wouldn’t obey, unlike a robot told to destroy itself.

			Although these three laws facilitate great stories, they are impractical. For example, what constitutes harm? If a robot comes across a homeless person, is it compelled to whisk him away to a shelter? Even if that person doesn’t want to be whisked away? Similarly, what happens if the robot is faced with a choice between two different harmful actions, like killing one person (e.g., a terrorist) to save the life of someone else? How could a machine decide what to do here when people can’t even agree on the moral appropriateness of such an action? Just like human morality, machine morality will invariably be messy.

			Whether machines will ever truly be moral, or conscious, or human, is unknown; but people certainly see them as having minds. These perceptions come not only from the cues we explored in chapter 2 on animals—eyes and expressions—but also from our own motivations of loneliness and social connection. This chapter revealed that membership in the mind club depends just as much on the mental states of the perceiver as on those of the perceived.

			Nevertheless, machines are becoming more and more sophisticated. They are already seen as capable thinking doers and may soon also be seen as vulnerable feelers, allowing them to break out of the agency-only half of the mind club. When machines are ascribed both agency and experience, they will—from the perspective of mind perception—be human. One Thanksgiving in the future, you may find your son bringing home his girlfriend from college. When you put down a plate of turkey in front of her, she politely demurs:


“Sorry, I don’t eat turkey.”

			“Vegetarian?” you ask, slightly annoyed.

			“No,” she says. “Robot. I eat only lithium hydride.”

			You sigh but say nothing—your son looks so in love. And she appears to love him too, so much so that years later she can’t help but cry when they exchange wedding vows.

			Crying and tenderness may seem out of place in a robot, but they are what primarily characterizes our next cryptomind: the patient.





Chapter 4


			THE PATIENT





A man is sleeping soundly in bed when someone creeps in and cuts off his penis. Fleeing the scene, the cutter tosses the member into a dark field. Is the perpetrator criminally guilty? Your first impulse is likely “Absolutely!” because cutting off someone’s manhood seems cruel and unusual, the kind of punishment banned by the Geneva Conventions. However, a jury found the perpetrator not guilty. To understand why requires context.

			As you may have guessed, the cutter is Lorena Bobbitt and the cuttee none other than her then-husband, John Bobbitt. Lorena and John had a rocky marriage, and reports suggest that John had long physically, emotionally, and sexually abused his wife.1 On the night of the incident, John allegedly raped Lorena—not for the first time—and then fell asleep. Sometime later Lorena went to the kitchen for a glass of water and found herself picking up a knife. Feeling terrified and trapped by the endless violence, she returned to the bedroom, did the deed, and then fled, throwing the penis out the car window as she drove away. Realizing the severity of her actions, she called 9-1-1 and a police search team soon located the missing member. After nine hours of surgery, John Bobbitt and his penis were reunited.

			John seemed to fully recover, starring in the adult films John Wayne Bobbitt Uncut and Frankenpenis, forming a band called the Severed Parts, and making an appearance on wrestling’s Monday Night Raw. He also went on to abuse his next wife and to face charges of grand larceny in Nevada for stealing more than $140,000 worth of clothing. Lorena became a hairdresser and founded “Lorena’s Red Wagon,” a nonprofit organization dedicated to raising awareness about domestic violence.

			The key question in Lorena’s trial was, who was the victim? In most crimes the identities of agent and patient are straightforward—there is a clear perpetrator and a clear victim—but was Lorena the victim or the aggressor? Lorena did cut off John’s penis, but she also suffered from his abuse. The jury decided that Lorena was not guilty, seeing her more as a vulnerable victim than as a calculating agent.

			The case of Lorena and John Bobbitt suggests an important tension between seeing minds as feelers and seeing them as doers. So far we’ve often discussed the mind club as if one were all “in” or all “out,” but our journey through animals and robots suggests that there are really two different mind clubs. Mirroring the fault line we revealed in chapter 1, there seems to be one club for thinking doers and another for vulnerable feelers.

			Although adult humans might technically be members of both clubs, others tend to belong mostly to one or the other. Just as governments want dual citizens to pick only one country to pledge their fealty to, people are often perceived to be either thinking doers or vulnerable feelers. We want to think of Lorena as either the calculating shrew or the battered wife and—to complement her—of John as either the aggrieved amputee or the callous husband. This important tension will resurface later in this chapter on the patient, but first we must define this term.

			The word “patient” usually brings to mind a medical context, in which patients are the center of a swirling galaxy of doctors, nurses, procedures, and diagnoses. More personally the word may evoke memories of trying to maintain your dignity while being poked and prodded in a gown designed to show the world your behind. But being a patient—or having patiency—is broader than just medicine. Patients are perceived to have experience and to be sensitive and susceptible to the actions of others. Whereas agents are the thinking doers of the world, patients are the vulnerable feelers. Of course, medical patients are also patients in this broader sense, but when we use the word “patient” we mean those entities at the top (and especially the top left) of the mind survey—people, children, and puppies.

			Although patients are vulnerable to both good and evil—to receiving both help and harm—we are usually more concerned with the darker side of patiency. We wonder how much someone (or something) suffers, how to alleviate this distress, and whether victimization causes enduring damage. With patients the most important questions concern pain, both its experience and the right to be protected from it. But what exactly is pain, and how do we know whether others are feeling it?

			Of all human experiences there is nothing more real, more present, and more captivating than pain. Whether caused by a toothache, a thrown back, or a deep cut, pain melts away the outside world, filling your whole consciousness with its reality. Complex thoughts, plans, and memories all vanish when you slam the car door on your hand.2 Even emotional pain, whether from a loved one’s death or a sudden breakup, demands all our attention. Agency—the capacity for planning and action—may be useful for the future, but the experience of pain pushes aside everything else and focuses us on the present. Planning for retirement may be difficult, but doing so while standing in a pile of razor blades is impossible.

			Pain may have overwhelming psychological power, but its physical reality is comparatively insubstantial. Pain is a mental construction based on a handful of nerve signals, the same kind of signals that let us experience green or yellow or smell lavender or chocolate. We might imagine that when in pain our cells secrete some terribly corrosive brain chemical, but the intensity of our suffering stems only from the microscopic electrical pulses of neurons. These neurons are typically triggered by external tissue damage, in a biological pathway that starts at the location of the cut, burn, or bruise, then proceeds through a neural “gate” in the spinal cord before arriving into the thalamus, the sensory hub of the brain.3

			Despite this typical pathway, pain can be triggered by nothing at all, such as in the case of people with neuropathic pain, who live in constant agony on account of a few rogue neurons.4 Such constant pain is excruciating, but more deadly is the inability to feel pain at all. Consider leprosy, a disease that has afflicted humans since biblical times. Leprosy causes numbness and an inability to feel pain, leaving individuals unable to realize that the pot they are holding is scalding hot or that they stepped on glass yesterday and their foot is now severely infected. Without the crucial information provided by the sensation of pain, those with leprosy cannot protect themselves from injury and so slowly lose pieces of themselves.5

			One striking illustration of the fickleness of pain is phantom limb pain. The medical patient “D.S.” experienced constant throbbing pain in his left hand, but when he went to rub it, he ran into a problem: his hand had been amputated years ago. There was no doubt that his pain was real, but without a limb to treat, conventional medicine was powerless to help. Recognizing that pain—like minds—hinges upon perception, neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran at the University of California at San Diego developed a perceptual trick of his own,6 constructing a special box with a mirror and two holes into which patients placed each of their arms. The mirror faced the still-present right hand, and its reflection provided D.S. with what appeared to be an intact left hand, an illusion that significantly decreased his pain.



			 				Figure 18: Ramachandran’s Mirror Box

				When a patient puts a healthy limb in the right side of box, their mind is tricked into perceiving two healthy limbs, alleviating phantom pains.



			 			The mind’s power to influence pain reveals itself in the placebo effect, in which mere expectation of pain reduction can decrease pain by up to 50 percent.7 In fact, many studies of popular drugs—Tylenol or paracetamol for back pain8 and Prozac, Effexor, or Paxil for mild depression9—suggest that they are no more effective than the combination of sugar pills and optimism.10 Hopeful expectations mean that any treatment is bound to be somewhat effective, helping to explain the success of alternative (and largely discredited) treatments ranging from reiki11 to reflexology.12 Even urotherapy—a fancy name for pee drinking—has been endorsed by J. D. Salinger,13 Madonna,14 and Jorge Posada15 solely on the strength of the placebo effect.16

			The influence of expectations, however, can also increase pain through the “nocebo effect.” In one study people felt real pain after researchers put sham electrodes onto their heads and pretended to send electric current through them.17 In a more subtle demonstration by Dutch researchers Arnoud Arntz and Lily Claassens,18 participants were instructed to touch a very cold (–25o C) metal probe. If you’ve ever licked a frozen pole, you know that extreme cold not only is painful but also strangely feels like burning.19 Arntz and Claassens capitalized on this ambiguity, telling participants that the metal was either very hot or very cold. They predicted that the identical “hot” probe would hurt more than the “cold” probe because people associate extreme heat with harm more than they do extreme cold. These predictions were confirmed, as “burning” hurt more than “freezing,” again demonstrating the power of expectations to shape pain.

			Neuroimaging studies suggest that pain has two distinct components, a sensory component and an affective component. The sensory component represents actual tissue damage and the “burning,” “cutting,” and “throbbing” aspects of pain.20 The affective component of pain is its felt badness, its aversiveness or unpleasantness. These two components are usually related—burning sensations are seldom pleasant—but they can be dissociated. For example, morphine eliminates the aversive affect while keeping the sensory experience.21 In one account of the effect of morphine, a car-accident victim calmly describes his experience of traumatic injury as “pain . . . but not painful,”22 with dulled unpleasantness but intact specific sensations.

			Even without drugs, tissue damage may not automatically translate to pain. In a classic account from the Korean War, physician Henry Beecher observed that grievously injured soldiers often felt no pain—and refused morphine—because of the intense rush of battle. The disconnect between physical damage and mental discomfort means that other people’s pain is especially shrouded in mystery. Pain—like all forms of experience—is felt only from the inside and so is ultimately inaccessible to others. Of course, that doesn’t stop people from trying to understand when others might be in pain.

			There are two routes through which we can understand the experience of others, whether it involves pain, pleasure, or the taste of fish. The first route is illustrated by the question “Does Jennifer like pickled sardines?” Without knowing anything about Jennifer, you’ve likely got an answer, and it’s probably the same answer to whether you like pickled sardines (i.e., “no”). To understand Jennifer you use simulation, relying on your own imagined experiences (e.g., I don’t like sardines) as a proxy for those of others (e.g., others don’t like sardines).23

			The second route is illustrated by a slightly different question, “Does Olga like sardines?” Now you might come up with a different answer (i.e., “yes”), because the name “Olga” suggests a mysterious foreigner whose tastes might swing toward slimy fish pickles. To understand Olga you use theorizing, which, unlike your imagination, uses explicit theories about others’ minds, such as “Russians like strange foods.”

			Simulation is the easier of the two routes, and so we rely on theorizing only when others are very different from us (e.g., Russian), rendering invalid our self-focused simulations. Neuroscientists Anna Jenkins and Jason Mitchell demonstrated this by neuroimaging Harvard undergrads who were thinking about experiences of other students who were either similar (urban liberals) or different (rural conservatives).

			Compared with thinking about dissimilar others, thinking about similar others activated brain regions linked to thinking about the self, as simulation predicts. This makes sense: if someone is like you, your experiences are good guides to theirs (and so you simulate), but if they are not like you, you’re better off relying on explicit reasons to explain their behavior (and so you theorize). One wrinkle to this distinction is that people generally assume that others are like them unless they have good reason to think otherwise, which further increases the scope and frequency of simulation.24

			Not only is simulation easier than forming explicit theories, but also people love thinking about themselves.25 We all know someone who is too focused on their own imagined experiences to understand yours. You mention a recent beach vacation and she immediately says, “Sounds terrible. I hate the beach—all that sand, those flies, and those tacky souvenir shops.” Never mind that you had a great time; she just can’t separate her own simulation from your experience. A more technical (or Greek) synonym for this self-centeredness is egocentrism, which psychological research has long demonstrated in those most selfish of people—children.

			The classic demonstration of egocentrism in children is the “false belief task.”26 Imagine Diane puts her candy in her dresser, but while she is at school her dad moves it to the kitchen cupboard. Where does Diane think the candy is? If you answered, “The dresser,” you are correct. Although you know the correct candy location, Diane does not—you just ascribed to her a false belief. If you answered, “The cupboard,” you are wrong. You either have severe brain damage or are three years old, but in either case we’re impressed that you’ve read this far! Children typically give this incorrect answer because they can’t distinguish their own correct beliefs from Diane’s false beliefs. Children are egocentric.

			Before you rush to conclusions about the stupidity of children, studies reveal that adults are also egocentric. In a clever demonstration of this effect, Nick Epley and his colleagues put participants in pairs and had one of them (the foreman) ask the other (the worker) to hand them a series of everyday objects. These objects were in the squares of a five-by-five shelving unit. Some—but not all—of the squares had wooden backs, and objects in these squares could be seen only by the worker (see figure 19).

			Crucially, three of the objects were toy cars—a small, a medium, and a large car—but the smallest car was hidden from the foreman’s view by a wooden back. The key trial came when the foreman asked for the “small car,” which from the foreman’s point of view was actually the medium car. To perform correctly, participants—who were always workers—had to overcome their own egocentric experience. When the study was run with children, most of them grabbed the wrong car, unable to ignore their own knowledge about the smallest car they could see. When adults participated, most of them grabbed the correct car but first looked at the wrong car.27 This suggests that adults remain egocentric but—unlike kids—can override that trait when necessary.



					 						Figure 19: A Test of Perspective Taking

						The “small” car is different from the perspective of the worker and the foreman.

						N. EPLEY, C. K. MOREWEDGE, AND B. KEYSAR, “PERSPECTIVE TAKING IN CHILDREN AND ADULTS: EQUIVALENT EGOCENTRISM BUT DIFFERENTIAL CORRECTION,” JOURNAL OF EXPERIMENTAL SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 40 (2004): 760–68.



				 			 			Simulation may sometimes lead us astray, but—much more than theorizing—it makes us care about the mental states of others. Theorizing uses cold theories about stimuli and responses—if shocked, then pain—but simulation uses our own feelings to predict those of others. In terms of our two dimensions of mind perception, simulation is grounded in our own experience (feeling their pain), whereas theorizing is grounded in our own agency (reasoning about their pain).

			It is simulation that gives rise to empathy. People have long struggled to define empathy and to determine whether it differs from sympathy or pity.28 However, a look at the German word for empathy clears this all up: Einfühlungsvermögen! Empathy is simply when you fühlung someone else’s vermögen—nothing more and nothing less. Now, the satisfied reader may skip ahead a few pages. But for the rest of you (and for us!) some explanation may be required.

			This German word actually translates to “in-feeling” and articulates the notion of sharing in another person’s feelings: feeling their pain when they are injured, feeling their anger when someone slights them, or feeling their embarrassment when they botch their big presentation. It is illustrated by Blaise Pascal, who said that “we know truth, not only by the reason, but also by the heart.”29 Empathy is about more than just dispassionately recognizing others’ suffering; it is about suffering alongside them. Because suffering is aversive, empathizing with another person’s pain compels you to help alleviate it. Empathy is why charity campaigns don’t simply report statistics but instead show us the doleful eyes of orphaned children, so that we can connect to their minds, simulate their suffering, and open our wallets.30

			If mental connection is necessary for empathy, then maintaining it is easiest when someone is nearby, as anyone in a long-distance relationship can attest. Skype-ing or talking on the phone is fine, but physical closeness uniquely increases caring. You can still empathize from a distance when your partner is fired, but touching their tears drives it home. The power of proximity in empathy is exemplified by this thought experiment from philosopher Peter Singer: Imagine you are walking by a pond, wearing a new three-hundred-dollar suit, when you see a drowning child.31 Should you save the child even if doing so will ruin the suit? You likely wouldn’t hesitate to dive in.

			Now imagine a different scenario. You are walking down the street after payday when a charity canvasser tells you that twenty dollars will save the life of a starving African child. Chances are you would keep your money and let the child die, even though saving the child costs a fraction of the cost of the suit. Why the difference?

			Empathy evolved when people lived in small groups of close relations, and so we care mostly about the visible suffering of those we know—similar others whose minds are easily simulated.32 Such empathy is poorly suited to the modern world, in which the neediest are people of different races and religions who live far away. Simulating the mind of a Muslim goat farmer is hard, and so we care little when he suffers. To solve this problem, charities try hard to represent the minds of the needy, highlighting their hopes and dreams—and their similarities to you: ten-year-old Ebele may live in faraway Sierra Leone, but she loves school and sometimes gets annoyed with her younger brother—just like American girls!

			Expressions of vulnerability are another way to compel empathy.33 As we saw in chapter 2 on animals, expressions translate internal experiences into external signals. Pain-related expressions include screaming, yelping, grimacing, and crying, which is why babies and puppies—with their big eyes and high-pitched cries—make perfect moral patients. Both babies and puppies are also very vulnerable; they are small and have soft skin and limited mobility. They couldn’t stop you from harming them and lack the agency to harm others, both characteristics of vulnerability that evoke feelings of tenderness and compassion.34 This link between vulnerability and compassion is likely endowed by evolution to guard against frustrated parents leaving their screaming (but helpless) infants in the woods.

			Our compassion for vulnerable moral patients translates into rage when they are harmed. People care when adults are injured, but they are incensed when children or animals suffer. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has allegedly attacked fur-coat owners,35 and some activists have even advocated killing scientists who experiment upon animals.36 Even the moral righteousness of incarcerated criminals is piqued when children are harmed: they will injure or murder fellow prisoners who are convicted of crimes against children.37 Vulnerable moral patients compel moral emotions because they fit so well into the moral dyad of “thinking doer plus vulnerable feeler.”38 Everyone looks like a culpable moral agent when standing next to a vulnerable baby or whimpering puppy.

			There is a limit on empathy, however, as we can simulate only so much suffering. Consider the once-popular commercial for the SPCA in which limping dogs and disfigured cats are paired with Sarah McLachlan’s slow, sad singing. In mere seconds you are instantly overwhelmed with feeling via an empathy sucker punch.

			The SPCA commercial illustrates two ironies. First, people, blasé in the face of genocide, are overcome with pity for a vulnerable dog, which not only lacks the intelligence of the least capable human but also enjoys the taste of garbage. Second, while some empathy is helpful, too much is counterproductive. In a study on the “collapse of compassion,” psychologists Daryl Cameron and Keith Payne presented participants with pleas from either one or eight suffering victims.39 Despite the objectively greater total suffering of eight victims, people were overwhelmed by it and demonstrated less compassion. One dying puppy is sad, but a whole football field of suffering puppies is—hey, did you see that new movie about vampires in space?

			Even more extreme than seeking distraction, empathy overload can make us wish for others to die. In one unpublished study from our lab led by Anna Jenkins, we described victims of horrific suffering, such as a bedridden elderly woman being engulfed in flames while her synthetic sheets melted into her skin. We varied whether the victim was awake or unconscious and asked participants whether the victim should live or die. We predicted that the active minds of awake victims would compel participants to simulate their pain, causing so much empathy that participants would recommend death.

			Our results confirmed this “better off dead” prediction—people recommended death for awake victims—as did a second unpublished study in which we gave some participants energy drinks before they read about suffering. These participants were especially likely to advocate death for conscious victims because their caffeine jitters added to their emotional overload. If excess empathy makes you hope for the death of moral patients, is less empathy better? Modern medicine seems to think so.

			In her poignant account of bipolar disorder, Linda Logan talks of familial disruption, of brief manic episodes with breathtaking productivity, and of longer depressive spells where she could barely rouse herself from bed. Despite these symptoms, she suffered most from losing her sense of self in the modern medical system, which downgraded her from person to mere patient—a passive recipient of care, characterized only by symptoms and suffering. Doctors ignored her complicated inner life, focusing instead on the mechanical details of neurochemistry and medication. Rather than simulating her experiences, her doctors simply relied on their explicit theories about her condition. She writes, “The moment the psych-unit doors locked behind me, I was stripped of my identity as wife, mother, teacher and writer and transformed into patient, room number and diagnosis.”40

			Unsurprisingly, medical patients are excellent examples of moral patients: they suffer and are vulnerable to harm. More than that, hospitals and clinics often treat people as only patients, stripping away the thoughts and plans of agency and leaving only raw experience. Think about the last time you went to the doctor’s office. Were you able to explain your illness-related thoughts and opinions, or did you simply list symptoms and wait for a diagnosis and prescription? One study revealed that doctors interrupted a patient an average of twelve seconds after meeting him or her;41 without listening to the words of patients, physicians have no hope of understanding their experiences.

			One of us (Kurt) recently went to the doctor for persistent daytime sleepiness. He recalls:


I needed a daily nap and could easily sleep twelve hours at a stretch. Colds arrived every month and lingered long, and the slightest stress further destroyed my already weak immune system. My mom had many theories about this feebleness—low vitamin D, antibiotics at birth, allergies—but one day my wife discovered the culprit. As she lay awake one night, listening to the house settling, she noticed me rasping, gasping, going completely silent, and then suddenly choking on my throat—classic signs of sleep apnea.

			When I explained this hypothesis to the doctor, he smirked and replied, “Well, that’s for me to figure out.” Sleep apnea typically plagues overweight folks, and as I am slim the doctor assumed I was mistaken. After all, he was the one with the MD.* He was the agent with the ability for action and thought, and I was the patient with the ability only for suffering. Nevertheless, with enough information about symptoms and family history—my grandmother’s snoring could destroy concrete foundations—the doctor agreed to a sleep study, which revealed that I stopped breathing once every five minutes (or approximately one hundred times a night).

			It appears that sometimes patients—and their spouses—have some insight. After all, they are the only ones to experience their problems from the inside.

			Of course, doctors obviously care deeply about helping others, but medicine trains them to detach in order to think rationally.42 Too much compassion or grief clouds objective clinical judgment and can lead to emotional burnout,43 so physicians often embrace insensitivity—especially specialty surgeons, who literally hold patients’ lives in their hands. In the operating room, the patient’s thoughts and feelings are irrelevant at best and paralyzing at worst as surgeons work on the delicate minutiae of the human body. This explains why surgeons hide under a sheet everything but the relevant square foot of flesh; peering into the tender faces of patients as you prepare to slice them open cannot make the job easier.

			Not all doctors are surgeons, and if any physician should be concerned with thoughts and feelings, it should be psychiatrists. The root of the word “psychiatry” is psyche, the Greek word for “soul” or “mind,” and historically psychiatrists, including Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud, have taken a deeply psychological and philosophical approach. However, recent advances in neurobiology focus attention away from human suffering and feelings and toward drugs that influence brain circuits and neurotransmitters. Psychiatry has been famously described by Thomas Szasz as mechanomorphic, treating patients like “defective machines” rather than feeling human beings.44 Paradoxically, physicians of the mind may fail to see their patients as members of the mind club.

			In treating mental illness, pharmaceuticals are undoubtedly powerful, but so is understanding a patient’s mind from the inside, as Logan’s account of bipolar disorder suggests. Research has shown that relatively mild mental illness can be improved simply by talking to empathic listeners, whether they are trained PhDs or nonpsychologist university professors.45 This “talk therapy” can result in benefits identical to those of drug therapy and even cause identical brain changes.46 So when a friend comes to you feeling blue or anxious, remember to listen carefully and respect both their patiency and their agency.

			You could also encourage them to help others. Continually receiving help reduces self-esteem and feelings of control, leading to feelings of helplessness and reduced agency.47 To reestablish this agency, patients need to become the givers of care, transforming into agents with increased self-confidence and personal power. It is no coincidence that twelve-step programs—whether for alcoholism or gambling addiction—involve sponsorship, in which senior members become shepherds for new members. By taking responsibility for another, you break through the mantle of victimhood, moving from one side of the mind-perception fault line to the other. Helping others turns you from a vulnerable feeler into a thinking doer.

			Beyond conferring feelings of agency, a study by Stephanie Brown at the University of Michigan revealed that helping others can add years to your life. Brown examined the mortality of older people who were the primary caregivers of their ill spouses. This is an incredibly stressful role because caregivers must manage every aspect of their spouse’s treatment and take ultimate responsibility for the spouse’s life. As stress is linked to an early death, the obvious prediction would be that caregivers would die earlier than noncaregivers—but they lived significantly longer, presumably because of increased feelings of agency.48

			Even taking care of plants can increase longevity. In one study, nursing home residents given responsibility for a houseplant outlived those who had plants that were looked after by nursing home staff.49 This may also explain why parenthood transforms the cowardly into the brave—children are the moral patients who turn moms and dads into powerful moral agents.

			Just how powerful do you become when you help others? Strong enough to lift a car, suggests the story of Alaskan teenager Riley Anderson. When Anderson arrived home from school, he found his father—the family mechanic—pinned underneath the family station wagon. The 1.5-ton Volkswagen had slipped off the jack and was now suffocating his dad. With help far away, Riley did what was needed: he took hold of the bumper and, with his bare hands, lifted the car off his father.50 Of course, Riley was likely helped by adrenaline, but we have experimentally confirmed the link between helping others and physical strength—participants can hold a five-pound weight longer if they first donate to charity.51

			These results suggest that personal power is not only a cause of heroism but also a consequence of it. Consider Mahatma Gandhi, who heroically helped India gain its independence from colonial rule in 1947. An examination of Gandhi’s early life suggests that he was born with no more agency than anyone else, with an unremarkable merchant-class childhood.52 However, as he strove for national freedom, he became able to endure hunger strikes that few of us can imagine. These feats of agency are even more amazing considering that Gandhi was first a moral patient, suffering discrimination and beatings at the hands of the European ruling class. By committing himself to helping others, he turned from patient to agent, a process we call moral transformation.

			Even if you’re not fighting colonial oppression, the link between moral agency and personal power tells us how to better run marathons (do it for charity) and how to focus better at work (help your colleagues).53 Of course, moral agents include not only heroes but also villains—does evil also increase agency? Studies from our lab suggest that the answer is yes.

			We asked participants to write fictional stories about themselves either helping others (hero), harming others (villain),* or just getting work done (neutral), all while holding a five-pound weight. Compared with the neutral condition, we found both our experimentally induced heroes and villains could hold the weight longer. Of course, there are many reasons to prefer goodness to cruelty, but if you want to establish your own agency, evil appears to do the trick. We can’t condone real cruelty, but try vividly imagining cleaning the toilet with your lazy roommate’s toothbrush or giving your boss’s BMW a quick swipe with your keys.

			Throughout this chapter the savvy reader may have noticed a general rule. It seems that being a moral patient reduces agency, and being a moral agent reduces patiency. When we see others—and ourselves—as vulnerable feelers, it is hard to see them as thinking doers; and when we see others—and ourselves—as thinking doers, it is hard to see them as vulnerable feelers. This inverse relation between perceptions of agency and patiency (i.e., experience) is called moral typecasting. Moral typecasting is a reflection of the mind-perception fault line we revealed back in chapter 1, the border that splits the mind club into two, separating thinking doers from vulnerable feelers.

			Typecasting is a frequent phenomenon in Hollywood, where the lovable jokester can’t be taken seriously in a dramatic role and the goofy best friend can’t be the main love interest. Perhaps the most powerful example of this was Leonard Nimoy as Spock. In real life Leonard Nimoy was passionate and playful, but people forever saw him as a cold and unfeeling personality because he played a Vulcan on Star Trek. Chafing against this typecasting, Nimoy entitled his first autobiography I Am Not Spock, but in the end he resigned himself to the role’s power and entitled his second autobiography I Am Spock.

			Just as we typecast actors into enduring character roles, so too do we often typecast people in enduring moral roles, seeing them as either those who do moral deeds or those who receive them. More succinctly, we see others as either moral agents or moral patients. It is hard to imagine Joseph Stalin as a victimized moral patient because of all the evil he committed. Likewise, it is hard to imagine a poor orphan as a responsible moral agent because of all the suffering she feels. As a more visual example, take a look at figure 20. When you see it as a duck, you cannot see it as a rabbit; when you see it as a rabbit, you cannot see it as a duck. Moral typecasting is this phenomenon applied to morality and mind perception: when you see someone as a moral agent, you are blind to their patiency, and when you see someone as a moral patient, you are blind to their agency.



					 						Figure 20: Either Duck or Rabbit, but Not Both

						One can be a moral agent or moral patient, but not both. (Translation: Which animals are most like each other? Rabbit and duck.)



				 			 			Given the tight link between morality (agents and patients) and mind perception (agency and experience), moral typecasting means that agents are seen as especially capable of agency but especially incapable of experience. Typecasting also means that patients are seen as especially capable of experience but especially incapable of agency. Of course—unlike the rabbit-duck—perceptions of people are seldom all or nothing, but moral typecasting suggests that heroes and villains should seem relatively insensitive to suffering, and victims should seem relatively incapable of responsibility. Studies in our lab confirm this idea. Both good moral agents (e.g., Mother Teresa) and bad moral agents (e.g., Hitler) were seen to be relatively impervious to pain, whereas victimized moral patients were seen as relatively blameless for misdeeds.54 Each of these aspects of moral typecasting—agents seeming insensitive and patients seeming blameless—has important implications.



					 						Figure 21: Moral Typecasting

						We see heroes and villains as insensitive to suffering and we see victims and beneficiaries as incapable of earning blame.

						K. GRAY, L. YOUNG, AND A. WAYTZ, “MIND PERCEPTION IS THE ESSENCE OF MORALITY,” PSYCHOLOGICAL INQUIRY 23 (2012): 101–24.



				 			 			That heroes and villains seem insensitive to pain can make us treat them poorly. For very evil criminals we demand proportionately harsh punishment—not only to atone for their sins but also to overcome their perceived toughness and ensure they suffer enough. That we are especially cruel to the especially cruel is not surprising, but we sometimes seem to mistreat those we admire, easily forgetting the sacrifices of our heroes. We neglect the feelings of our parents, the trials of our mentors, and the suffering of our leaders.

			Going back to the idea of schemas (i.e., mental models) from chapter 3 on machines, our schema for heroes is grounded in moral typecasting—those who do good seem tougher than us and better able to endure life’s tribulations. This “moral agent only” schema means that the suffering of heroes is less salient and less demanding of empathy than that of others. When a normal person is punched, our heart leaps, but when Superman or Batman gets punched, we shrug it off because we expect them to do the same. If heroes seem tougher than most, then we may be more likely to give them pain. Admittedly, people seldom enjoy betraying the saintly, but often when push comes to shove—when someone has to be harmed—people harm their heroes.

			We tested this idea in our lab, asking people to imagine possessing pain pills—not pain-relieving pills but pain-causing pills—with one pill causing mild discomfort and four pills causing excruciating (but temporary) pain. Participants divided three pills between pairs of people, which included good agents (Mother Teresa), bad agents (serial killer Ted Bundy), neutral targets (a bank teller), and moral patients (an orphan). In many pairs the division of pills was unsurprising: people gave more pain to Ted Bundy than to the orphan.

			The key pair was the bank teller versus Mother Teresa, because it contrasted two competing predictions. Giving less pain to the nun would reward her good deeds, supporting the idea of karma and just deserts (i.e., good things happen to good people). Alternatively, giving Mother Teresa more pain would support moral typecasting, revealing that people allocate pain based on mind perception and moral roles.

			Typecasting won the day: people gave more pain to Mother Teresa than to the bank teller. Admittedly, they weren’t happy about it. While making these decisions, people laughed nervously and asked questions like “Are you sure I can’t just split a pill in half?” But at the end of the day, people stuck it to the elderly nun who’d devoted her life to helping others.55 How’s that for justice?

			Of course, you might reason that Mother Teresa can actually handle the pain, but imagine a meeting at work where someone is being selected to develop client relationships in Siberia. Chances are the person packing her parka will be the person who has a history of doing previously thankless tasks. If you’ve done past good deeds, others see you as capable of handling terrible burdens that no one else wants to bear—whether that perception is true or false. So next time your selflessness is praised in front of others, beware: making sacrifices for others makes it easier for them to sacrifice you.

			That moral agents seem incapable of being vulnerable feelers is the first principle of moral typecasting. That moral patients seem incapable of being (blameworthy) thinking doers is the second principle. For its illustration we again turn to celebrities.

			When the rich and famous run afoul of the law, they follow a predictable script. The opening act is the crime itself: Mr. Celebrity is pulled over for swerving all over the road in a car that costs more than your house. After attempting to hide a bag of drugs under the passenger seat, Mr. Celebrity stumbles out of his car and eloquently explains to the police that the drugs are not his fault but instead that of a convenient ethnic group, such as Canadians or leprechauns. The next act is their mug shot, indictment, and the predictable Twitter explosion.

			The following act is the victim act. The celebrity’s spokesperson provides a statement such as “Mr. Celebrity has long been a victim of drug use, alcoholism, and depression arising from difficult childhood circumstances. Mr. Celebrity extends a sincere apology to all leprechauns and those of leprechaun descent and will be spending the next couple of months out of the public eye, recovering from this terrible constellation of diseases.” In other words, although Mr. Celebrity seems like a rich, entitled racist, that’s just not true! Instead he or she is a victim who, despite all the cars, money, and fame, feels only pain. Of course, celebrities—like everyone else—do struggle with mental-health and addiction issues, but these patient-oriented qualities are trotted out only to dodge blame. The key is that this strategy works—victims do escape blame!

			Typecasting provides the basis for this winning strategy. When someone is cast as a victimized moral patient—a vulnerable feeler—it is difficult to simultaneously see him or her as an agent responsible for wrongdoing. This explains why defendants on trial often testify to the suffering or abuse they experienced in their lives,56 such as in the case of Lorena Bobbitt. More recently a wealthy Texas teen who killed four people while driving drunk avoided jail time because he was a victim of “affluenza.” His lawyer successfully argued that his impaired judgment was a result not of his blood alcohol content of 0.24 but of his sheltered and privileged—and therefore difficult—upbringing.57

			Studies from our lab confirm victims’ ability to escape blame. Participants gave less blame to moral patients (e.g., a victim of crime) than to neutral targets or even good agents (e.g., a life-saving doctor) after committing a bad deed such as vandalism.58 Consistent with moral typecasting, this reduced blame was driven by mind perception, such that victims were seen as vulnerable feelers, and these perceptions of victimhood led to clemency.

			The most surprising extension of this side of typecasting is that highlighting past good deeds can be counterproductive, at least when guilt is certain. Past good deeds reinforce agency, responsibility, and control, explaining why it is all but impossible to forgive the misdeeds of priests and presidents. On the other hand, victimization turns people into blameless moral patients, explaining why we discount the transgressions of the abused and afraid. In this sense, although it seems that good is the opposite of evil, the mind-perception gap between agents and patients creates a different moral landscape: good and evil are both the opposite of victimhood. It may be relatively easy for a do-gooder to turn evil or for a victim to become a beneficiary, but it is much harder to turn—at least in the eyes of others—from a victim to a villain or from a villain to a victim.



					 						Figure 22: The Moral Landscape

						We often divide morality into good and evil, but typecasting suggests that whether someone is seen as a moral agent or patient can sometimes be even more important.



				 			 			Typecasting also explains why children receive less blame for misdeeds: their reasoning and self-control are not fully developed until adulthood, but their capacity for suffering and harm exists from birth. Even looking like a child can lead to less blame. In a series of studies on facial structure, researcher Leslie Zebrowitz found that those who have “baby faces,” with big eyes and round cheeks, were given less blame in small-claims court for intentional wrongs.59

			Typecasting has a limit, however, when the deed is sufficiently evil. When two ten-year-old boys lured British toddler James Bulger away from his parents and then tortured and murdered him, the public saw the boys as agents, demanding that they be tried as adults.60 Despite the young age of the offenders, the murder was so heinous, and the victim was such an extreme patient—a helpless two-year-old—that our minds cannot help but see them as agents. Just as in the case of the evil pig and the dead peasant baby in chapter 2 on animals, dyadic completion compels us to see as villains those typically lacking agency when someone even more helpless suffers.

			Dyadic completion can also induce perceptions of suffering in the face of sin. So far we have explored dyadic completion from patient to agent—when vulnerable victims compel us to see thinking doers—but it also happens in reverse. When someone commits an evil act, a dyadic template compels us to see suffering victims, even if the act is objectively harmless. For illustration consider the case of Anita Bryant.

			Anita Bryant used to be a country singer. In the 1950s and 1960s she had a couple of Billboard hits, including “Till There Was You” and “Paper Roses.” As a former Miss Oklahoma, she was also pretty and charismatic, which helped her become the spokesperson for the Florida Citrus Commission.* Anita also had strong views on homosexuality: she was horrified by the advancement of gay rights and particularly incensed by the passage of a Florida law that forbade discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. She vowed to repeal it, sensing a slippery moral slope: “If gays are granted rights, next we’ll have to give rights to prostitutes and to people who sleep with Saint Bernards and to nail biters.”61 She was eventually successful in repealing the law, but her campaign of homophobia had irreparably damaged her reputation, costing her her singing career, her marriage, and the goodwill of Florida citrus farmers.

			To Bryant homosexuality wasn’t simply wrong; it was also harmful. She believed it would lead to the destruction of America as she knew it and titled her autobiography The Anita Bryant Story: The Survival of Our Nation’s Families and the Threat of Militant Homosexuality. In her mind, because homosexuals couldn’t easily have their own children, they would recruit the sons and daughters of God-fearing heterosexual parents. These recruits would be brainwashed by the charismatic gays and become gay too, eventually leading to the demise of the family.

			Decades later many still believe that homosexuality spells disaster for America. In 2012 North Carolina pastor Michael Barrett suggested that failing to ban gay marriage would be “equivalent to a nuclear holocaust.” And when the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the Defense of Marriage Act, a Christian newspaper heralded the decision as a harbinger of Armageddon.*62

			To those who see sexual orientation as a matter of biology and not morality, claims of its harmfulness seem hyperbolic, but the moral dyad suggests that perceptions of harm are legitimate, even if disconnected from objective harm. Just as—despite many cues to mind—the objective criteria for mind-having are unclear, objective criteria for harm are also often elusive. Of course, there are some obvious cues to direct physical and emotional harm, such as bloodshed, crying, and death, but not all harm is so transparent. Gay marriage seems not to cause death and dismemberment, but how are we to objectively disprove the idea that gay marriage causes “societal decay” or “spiritual damnation”? These kinds of harm are a matter of perception and are perceived when people see immorality. Such harm may seem nebulous, but people often see a direct link between this abstract harm and more direct suffering—a weakened America is more vulnerable to terrorists or race riots. Evil deeds inevitably create perceived suffering victims.

			The researcher Peter DeScioli has an elegant name for this kind of “agent to patient” dyadic completion—the “indelible victim effect”—and it is ubiquitous.63 Those who see drug use as wrong think it harms teenagers; those who see flag burning as wrong think it harms disabled veterans; and those who see masturbation as wrong think it harms children. Suffering children are actually a common theme in moral uproar, because their status as vulnerable feelers makes them obvious moral patients.

			Research from our lab conducted with Chelsea Schein shows that perceptions of victimhood arise not from effortful justification but automatically from our dyadic moral minds. In one study participants read about “harmless” misdeeds, such as defiling a corpse or using strange masturbation techniques, and then rated their harmfulness. Participants not only saw these wrongs as generally harmful but saw even more harm when given a strict time limit that precluded conscious reasoning. Another study in the same set revealed that people perceived more suffering in the faces of children—within milliseconds—after reading about masturbation and necrophilia.64

			If harm automatically accompanies judgments of immorality, then dyadic completion casts doubt on the very existence of “victimless wrongs.” Harmless wrongs may be a logical possibility but—psychologically speaking—are exceedingly rare; only those who fail to see immorality fail to see harm. Because perceptions of harm are ever present in moral judgments, harm provides a powerful way of understanding morality across cultures.

			It is clear that different people have different morals. Muslims believe it’s immoral to eat pigs but happily eat hamburgers, and Hindus think it’s immoral to eat cows but happily eat bacon. Conservatives believe it’s immoral to burn an American flag, whereas liberals think of it as an expression of free speech.65 These and many other differences in morality often lead to disagreement and conflict, and sometimes even war. Some suggest an unbridgeable moral chasm between different cultures—like conservatives and liberals66—but mind perception suggests a bridge of understanding.

			People may disagree over what exactly is wrong, but our studies find that all people have the same dyadic moral mind. Both liberals and conservatives agree that immorality causes harm, and this similarity may be the key to finding other common ground. We often talk of “perspective taking” as a way to understand moral disagreements, and the moral dyad provides a specific way for taking others’ perspectives. When confronted with an opposing moral viewpoint, try to understand how this act could be seen as harmful. If nothing else, remember that the “other side” isn’t inventing harms merely to inflame passions and fearmonger—those who oppose something on moral grounds legitimately see it as causing suffering.

			The slipperiness of suffering has been the theme of this chapter. Out of all mental capacities, the ability to feel pain is the most crucial for admission into the mind club. Those who seem capable of suffering are moral patients and deserve moral rights. Unfortunately, out of all mental capacities, the ability to feel pain may be the most cryptic. To understand this very internal sensation, we rely on both simulation and theories about other minds—both of which are flawed.

			Although we never like our pain to be ignored, when it comes to define us, we become a true patient, stripped of agency and seen only as a vulnerable feeler. This tension between being seen as doer and being seen as feeler stems from moral typecasting, our tendency to view others as either moral agents or moral patients. Being cast as a patient can help us escape blame and compel others to protect us, but it can also weaken us and even shorten our lives. Moral patients not only form the natural complement to moral agents but also provide a powerful way to understand moral disagreements, as people everywhere link immorality to perceived harm.

			One thread running through our discussion of moral patients is that we care about them. Whether they are children, animals, or adults, and whether they suffer physically, mentally, or spiritually, we want to alleviate their pain. The same can’t be said for our next cryptomind. This cryptomind is one whose suffering we shrug off with cold indifference and whose torture we often embrace: the enemy.





Chapter 5


			THE ENEMY





Michael Johnson enlisted in the U.S. Army after high school because of his love of country and belief in democracy. On his very first mission, he was captured by Muslim extremists and held for more than ten years. He was imprisoned in a small, cold cell, and when his captors wanted information, they beat him, punching him in the mouth, ribs, and back. Once, they blindfolded him, threw him into a powerboat, and beat him while driving in circles. One extremist would make him drink salt water and slam his head against the side of the boat while another kept punching him. He received only enough first aid to survive for the next day of torture. His captors would stop at nothing until he revealed everything he knew—even if he knew nothing.

			This account likely filled you with empathy for Johnson and rage toward the Muslim extremists, but it isn’t quite true. In the real account, it wasn’t Michael Johnson who was captured but a Muslim man named Mohamedou Ould Slahi,1 who was suspected to have some connection with the events of 9/11. To allay these suspicions, Slahi voluntarily presented himself for questioning shortly after the attacks, and although he was cleared by Jordanian intelligence, he somehow found himself shipped to an American air force base in Afghanistan before ending up in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Once there, he experienced the torture outlined above, all at the hands of Americans who presumably have stories similar to that of the fictional Michael Johnson—who loved their country, democracy, their friends, and families. How could these otherwise caring men and women2 torture an innocent man for an entire decade?

			In previous chapters we’ve seen that people have difficulty not perceiving minds, seeing thoughts in animals, goals in robots, and emotions in inanimate objects. Accordingly, you might think it inevitable that we see minds in other people, who almost certainly have the ability to think and feel. This is true when it is our people—our inner circle of friends and family. But when people lie outside this circle—especially when they are our enemies—we easily strip away their minds, seeing them not as human beings but as dumb beasts, cold machines, or insensate objects. We are only too happy to expel those we dislike from the mind club.

			In contrast to anthropomorphism, which involves the ascription of human qualities to animals and objects, this chapter explores dehumanization, the denial of human qualities to other people. At its most extreme, dehumanization enables systemic discrimination and genocide, but it also occurs in everyday life, such as when we ignore the experience of the homeless or the agency of the beautiful. The most reliable predictor of dehumanization is antipathy—seeing someone as your enemy.

			Some enemies are a matter of blood, such as in the feud between the Hatfields and the McCoys, which left eleven family members dead from shootings, stabbings, and beatings.3 Some enemies are a matter of religious belief, with many killed in the battles of Muslims versus Hindus, Christians versus Muslims, and Catholics versus Protestants. Perhaps the most intractable conflict today is between Israelis and Palestinians, two peoples separated by culture, race, religion, language, and history. With so many differences and so much historical antagonism, conflict seems all but inevitable. People have divided into “us versus them” based on much less. How much less?

			To answer this question, social psychologists have created the “minimal-groups paradigm,” in which people are divided by arbitrary criteria such as shirt color4 or modern art preference.5 One study (randomly) divided participants into two groups—Kandinsky lovers and Klee lovers—before they distributed resources among themselves.6 As predicted, the “Kandinsky” people took more for themselves and sabotaged the “Klee” people, and vice versa, despite their meaningless and made-up division.

			Even more arbitrary, another related experiment showed participants hundreds of dots and asked them to guess the number.7 Conforming to laws of probability, half underestimated the number and half overestimated the number, and researchers labeled participants either dot “underestimators” or “overestimators.” As before, people were kind to their own group but cruel to the other group: “Sure, he may look friendly, but I don’t want my taxes going to a dot overestimator!” This favoritism may seem absurd, but likely no more absurd than arguments between Catholics and Protestants sound to atheists or debates between academics sound to nonacademics.

			Perhaps the most elegant minimal-groups study was conducted in 1968 by Mrs. Jane Elliott, a third-grade teacher in rural Iowa. Following the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., she wanted her students to learn firsthand about the pernicious effects of prejudice. As her students were all white and Christian, she made a new racial distinction—proclaiming that children with brown eyes were inferior to children with blue eyes. In no time the blue-eyed children grew smug and powerful and treated their brown-eyed classmates with condescension and cruelty, seeing them as less than human. Many dark-eyed children took this mistreatment to heart, believing that their eye color justified the callousness of their cerulean-eyed masters. Other brown-eyed children chafed under this subjugation, acting out against the society that devalued them. Based on one simple statement about the value of iris pigmentation, Mrs. Elliott had created a robust racial structure remarkably similar to that of modern America.8

			Along similar lines, social psychologist Muzafer Sherif conducted the classic “Robber’s Cave” study at a boys’ summer camp. The camp had two clusters of cabins divided by a small forest, and boys were randomly assigned to one side, “the Eagles,” or the other, “the Rattlers.” In short order the boys had bonded strongly within their own groups and held nothing but contempt toward the other group, despite being fundamentally all the same.9 In real life, boys no older than those of the Robber’s Cave study are told that they are a Crip (blue) or a Blood (red) and are expected to show unwavering allegiance to their brothers and ruthless cruelty to their rivals. The boys from Sherif’s study used sticks and stones to claim the forest as their own, whereas those in gangs use handguns to claim drug-distribution territory, but the psychological underpinnings are the same. Superficial differences grow to be extremely meaningful, leading group members to deny their rivals minds and moral rights.

			Whether in real life or in experiments, intergroup conflict arises from different identities. You and your friends are black, French, atheist dot overestimators, whereas “they” are all white, Russian, religious dot underestimators. The divisive power of identity suggests that its elimination might erase the conflict between people. If people were truly “color-blind,” as well as “religion-blind” and “dot-estimation-blind,” would they still form “us” and “them”? Our research suggests that they would. Even without identity, group formation is as easy as 1-2-3.

			To get groups to form in a population of people, you need only three elements. The first is the opportunity for kindness or cruelty, situations in which two people can interact either nicely or nastily. The second is reciprocity, the technical term for paying people back. Reciprocity is when you are friendly to people who treat you nicely and unfriendly to people who treat you nastily. Over time reciprocity can make for best friends or mortal enemies. Imagine that the first time you meet someone, they compliment your clothes. This leads to a feedback cycle in which you compliment them and the two of you talk about your common interests, grab coffee, see movies together, and become lifelong friends. Conversely, imagine that the first time you meet someone, they insult your clothes. This starts a very different feedback cycle in which you insult their clothes and the two of you spread vicious rumors about each other, vandalize each other’s homes, and seduce each other’s spouses.

			To move beyond individual friends and enemies to groups of “us” and “them,” we need the third element, transitivity. Transitivity means sharing your friends’ opinion of others—liking your friends’ friends and disliking your friends’ enemies. Transitivity is typically established via gossip, in which two people discuss the deeds of mutual acquaintances and align their perceptions accordingly. “Did you hear about Becky?” “She’s so sneaky.” “I hate her!” “Me too!” When transitivity doesn’t hold, awkwardness results—just try making fun of your best friend’s spouse or your spouse’s best friend.

			With an interdisciplinary crew including evolutionary biologist Dave Rand, sociologist Kevin Lewis, and social psychologist Mike Norton, we programmed a computer simulation in which mindless, identity-less agents interacted with reciprocity and transitivity. As expected, these simple agents robustly clustered into stable groups characterized by in-group cooperation and out-group cruelty.* Of course, the agents in our computer simulations are far less sophisticated than real people, but that’s the point. If simple computer agents inevitably cluster into groups, there is no doubt that real humans—with entrenched identities, races, and religions—will also form groups.

			There seems to be no avoiding “us” and “them,” but some group landscapes encourage more ruthlessness than others. Competition for resources is the catalyst that turns “them” into “enemies” and transforms dislike into cruelty. In the land of plenty there is no need to fight, but when resources are tight, competition becomes a matter of survival—and it’s easier to win if you have a group backing you up.

			The link between resource competition and intergroup hostility is neatly demonstrated by comparing chimpanzees with bonobos. Both primates are evolutionary cousins of humans, but they have very different temperaments and social structures. Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have a male-dominated society, are quick to aggress, and form gangs that mercilessly eliminate enemies.10 If a male stumbles alone into enemy territory, rival chimpanzees will attack with overwhelming force, often ripping off his face and testicles (so he won’t have any vengeful heirs).11 Chimpanzees will also cannibalize the babies of rivals12 and have been known to bite off the fingers of humans who study them.13

			In contrast to the male-dominated chimpanzees, bonobos (Pan paniscus) are female dominated and solve problems with sex instead of violence. In fact, they have sex all the time, not only standard female-with-male but also other combinations. Female-with-female genital-on-genital rubbing is a popular way to cement power alliances and demonstrate bonds of friendship and is certainly more exciting than meeting for coffee. Of course, bonobos still have conflicts and will sometimes act violently, but much less so than chimpanzees.

			The difference between these two species lies in resource competition across evolutionary history. Chimps live on the north side of the Congo River, a territory shared with gorillas, which eat much of the same food.14 Bonobos live on the south side of the Congo River, without gorillas and therefore with less competition for food. The perennial dearth of food on the north side compels chimpanzees to band together in ruthless gangs, fighting for the meager remaining resources. The abundance of food on the south side allows bonobos to instead spend their days indulging their insatiable nymphomania.



					 						Figure 23: Chimps (left) and Bonobos (right)

						Increased resource competition means that chimps are more aggressive than bonobos, who often solve problems with sex.

					 				 				 			 			Humans share an evolutionary legacy with both chimpanzees and bonobos, but news headlines suggest that we may be more like chimps than bonobos. Humans often face resource competition, form gangs, and act ruthlessly toward enemies. Recent research shows that resource scarcity deepens divisions between “us” and “them,” leading people to endorse stereotypes of other races and deny them resources.15 This potential for cruelty is facilitated by the ambiguity of mind perception; just as we can give mind—and moral rights—to the relatively mindless, so too can we can take it away from the minded, seeing “them” as less than human.

			When we dislike, fear, compete with, or even lust after other people, we dehumanize them, stripping perceived mind and casting them out of the mind club. Just as we perceive mind along the two dimensions of agency and experience, so too can we deny mind along them. Stripping away agency moves people away from the top right of the mind map we revealed in chapter 1 (high agency, high experience) toward the top left (low agency, high experience). As this location is occupied by animals, this form of dehumanization is called “animalizing.”

			Stripping away experience again moves people away from the top right of the mind map and toward the bottom right (high agency, low experience). On the farthest right we have God, but this is too exalted a position for “them.” Instead we must drift somewhat left to the robot; when we deny others experience, we dehumanize by likening them to machines, a process called “mechanization.”

			These two forms of dehumanization were coined by Australian psychologist Nicholas Haslam16 and his colleagues Stephen Loughnan and Brock Bastian. They should remind you of the mind-perception fault line revealed in chapter 1 and the idea of moral typecasting we covered in chapter 4 on patients. Animalizing and mechanizing reinforce the idea that people are often seen as either vulnerable feelers (when they are animalized) or thinking doers (when they are mechanized). Dehumanization typically turns “them” into either unfeeling doers or unthinking feelers.

			Perhaps the clearest example of animalizing—of stripping agency—is found in early accounts of Europeans who explored Africa; they regaled Victorian Britain with stories of barbaric “savages.” These Africans were portrayed as animals or children, as emotional, fearful, angry, and joyous but seldom capable of self-control, rationality, or morality.17 White men believed that it was in the best interests of the “savages” to have white men keep them safe but subservient, much like pets. The same sentiment existed in America, with Secretary of State John Calhoun stating in 1844, “The African is incapable of self care and sinks into lunacy under the burden of freedom. It is mercy to give him the guardianship and protection from mental death.”18 This paternalism helped to rationalize partitioning sovereign states into colonies, waging war against resistance, and raiding natural resources. Even more pernicious, animalizing was used to justify slavery; just as ranchers kept a stable of helpful livestock, so too did white landowners keep a stable of helpful humans, often treating them no better (and sometimes much worse) than actual livestock.

			Colonialism is now out of vogue, but animalization is still present in modern society, if more subtly. In America it manifests itself most powerfully with stereotypes of black people, as research finds that people are quicker to associate images of apes—and apelike descriptions—with black people than with white people.19 Some of these qualities, such as aggressiveness, toughness, and strength, may seem positive in contexts such as sports, where fans praise the ferocity of linebackers and the hunger of basketball players, but can have insidious effects upon racial equality—who wants to hire an animalistic CEO?20 Of course, these stereotypes ignore powerful agentic exemplars such as President Barack Obama and anti-Apartheid revolutionary Nelson Mandela, but they still persist. In 2012, at the Republican National Convention, two people were thrown out for tossing handfuls of peanuts at a black CNN camerawoman, saying, “This is how we feed animals.”21 There were clearly animals there, but they weren’t the camerawoman.



			Figure 24: Historical Animalization

			Anti–civil rights propaganda links African Americans to apes.

			ILLUSTRATION FROM A NATIONAL STATES’ RIGHTS PARTY PAMPHLET.

			 			As a form of dehumanization, animalizing leads perceivers toward paternalism and condescension. As we’ve seen in previous chapters, perceiving entities as vulnerable feelers makes people want to protect them and extend them at least some moral rights. On the other hand, mechanizing leads perceivers toward fear and outright hatred. Perceiving entities as unfeeling and robotic thinking doers makes people want to blame them, not protect them. If you remember the “Baby vs. Robot” thought experiment—and the mind survey—from chapter 1, we both hold machines morally responsible and allow them to be destroyed.

			Anti-Semitism often exemplifies mechanizing, portraying Jewish people as powerful but unsympathetic, as wealthy but ruthless. One quote by Martin Luther, the sixteenth-century Protestant reformer, is revealing: “But the Jews are so hardened that they listen to nothing. . . . It is a pernicious race, oppressing all men by their usury and rapine. If they give a prince or magistrate a thousand florins, they extort twenty thousand from the subjects in payment. We must ever keep on guard against them.”22 To use the terms of the mind survey, Luther portrays Jewish people as high in agency, emphasizing their capacity for intending and planning complex conspiracies regarding business, politics, and banking.

			Similar mechanizing stereotypes of Asian Americans have been recently bolstered by Amy Chua, the Chinese American who wrote Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother. Chua believes that Western mothers focus too much on their children’s feelings and not enough on their deeds, thereby limiting their capacity to succeed. In contrast, she minimizes the feelings of her children and focuses exclusively on their agency, driving them toward perfection. One instructive quote from Chua to her children: “If the next time’s not perfect, I’m going to take all your stuffed animals and burn them.”23



			 				Figure 25: WWII Mechanizing Propaganda

				American propaganda implying that the Japanese are not only evil but—unlike Americans—will never feel the need for relaxation.



			 			As these examples begin to show, people feel threatened by those they mechanize, because machines are solely thinking doers, invulnerable and unstoppable. For example, the animated Disney World War II propaganda film Education for Death: The Making of the Nazi describes a young man raised to be a fearsome Nazi soldier. As he goose-steps monotonously to a drum, the narrator intones, “In him, there is no seed of laughter, hope, tolerance or mercy. For him, only heiling and marching, marching and heiling.”24 The frightening picture of relentless, killing robots means that mechanized peoples are separated from the general population, such as Japanese Americans in the internment camps of World War II or Jews in the concentration camps of the Holocaust.

			Both mechanizing and animalizing are paths to dehumanization, but they are paths to partial dehumanization. In both these cases people still keep half their minds, just as they do in moral typecasting, and—as in moral typecasting—there are often compensatory perceptions. Stereotypes of black people that deny their agency also highlight their experience as more emotional, more filled with sexual desire, and more in tune with their bodies. Mechanizing people denies their experience but simultaneously emphasizes their agency. In contrast to this partial—and compensatory—dehumanization, the most extreme dehumanization involves total stripping of mind, the denial of both agency and experience. Rather than animalizing or mechanizing, we can call this dehumanization objectification, seeing someone not as an animal or robot but as an object without any mind at all.

			This most extreme form of denied mind and dehumanization is best exemplified by genocide. Although other Nazis may have seen the Jews as threats, Adolf Eichmann, the SS Obersturmbannführer (lieutenant colonel) who implemented Hilter’s “Final Solution,” saw them as a mere logistical challenge. He wondered how to design train schedules to most effectively move the Jews to concentration camps and how to best execute them and dispose of their bodies. Likewise, gas chambers were designed not to inflict maximum suffering but instead to be maximally efficient, killing the most people in a way that was both time and cost effective.

			Beyond the extreme example afforded by the Holocaust, we ignore the minds of others in everyday life—such as homeless people—because they hold no instrumental value. In daily life different people can fulfill different goals. A librarian can help you find an old book, a friend can help set you up with a date, but a homeless person seems to help you with nothing but feelings of guilt. This renders them not only mentally invisible but also physically invisible. Studies by Jazmin Brown-Iannuzzi and Keith Payne at the University of North Carolina reveal that people completely fail to see homeless people in a visual scene unless the homeless people can fulfill a specific goal for the perceiver. As we saw in chapter 3 on machines, we see minds when they are useful to us; it also seems that we ignore them when they are not useful.

			Not only can hate, fear, and indifference lead to dehumanization, but so can love—or at least lust. If you and your friends discussed the talents and characteristics of adult film stars, words that likely wouldn’t come up are “intellectual,” “cerebral,” “perspicacious,” and “generously endowed.” Okay, maybe that last one, but the key is that we seem not to associate sex with mental characteristics. In fact, there seems to be a tension between seeing someone as a beautiful mind and seeing someone as a beautiful body.

			Sex makes us think of concrete parts of someone—chest, abs, butt—whereas a mind is the whole of a person, an abstract identity. Sex seems to focus our attention on the physical and lead us to ignore the mental. This fact was not lost on the eighteenth-century philosopher Immanuel Kant, who wrote, “Sexual love makes of the loved person an Object of appetite; as soon as that appetite has been stilled, the person is cast aside as one casts away a lemon which has been sucked dry.”25 Of course, lemon sucking and sex may seem to differ in enjoyability,* but the point is clear—people who are sexualized are seen as simply a means to achieving satisfaction and not as people themselves.

			A more contemporary philosopher, Martha Nussbaum, makes a similar point, suggesting that sexualizing others objectifies them, stripping them of their autonomy and their subjectivity—i.e., their perceived agency and experience.26 Technically, both men and women can be objectified, but research on sexual objectification typically centers on the objectification of women by men, such as via the “male gaze,” that lingering, up-and-down leer bestowed upon professional women as they walk by construction sites.27

			Objectification not only unnerves recipients but also systematically undermines gender equality. A woman seen in terms of her body is unlikely to be first in line for a promotion, although she may have intelligence and ambition in spades. We want an incisive mind to lead and manage, not a shapely behind, and the more we focus on the latter, the less we think of the former. Unfortunately, norms of fashion and appearance mean that there is no easy way out of this problem; a woman who wears a burlap poncho to work may avoid the leers of her male colleagues but will also seem strange and unattractive. In infuriating unfairness, women are punished both for being too attractive and for being too unattractive.

			For an obvious example of the objectification of women, just open a magazine. It doesn’t even have to be a men’s magazine; you can use a women’s magazine or even a current-events magazine. You’ll immediately notice that while men are often depicted by just their faces, women are often depicted as full bodies, sometimes fully clothed but more often revealing substantial skin.28 The difference between depictions of men and women is called “face-ism” because women’s faces occupy much less space in ads than men’s faces.29 Face-ism reduces perceptions of agency because it is the face—and not the chest—that conveys our thoughts and goals.30



					 						Figure 26: Objectifying Women

						In advertising, women’s bodies are often shown, whereas men are often depicted solely by their faces, a phenomenon called “face-ism.”

						CREDIT SHAWN DALEY.



			 			 			It’s clear that seeing someone as a body strips away perceived agency, but is the same true about experience? When you wear a revealing outfit, do people deny you both the ability to think and act and the ability to feel and sense? To answer this question, we teamed up with philosopher Joshua Knobe and psychologists Paul Bloom and Lisa Feldman Barrett. There were two competing hypotheses. The “object” hypothesis, advanced by centuries of philosophy, suggests that focusing on the body strips away all mind—both agency and experience.

			The other hypothesis will be familiar to you from chapter 4 on patients. It is the “typecasting” hypothesis. Instead of stripping away all mind, the typecasting hypothesis suggests that seeing someone’s body will actually increase perceived experience. Reflecting the fault line between agents and patients, typecasting predicts that the less you are seen as a thinking doer, the more you’ll be seen as a vulnerable feeler. More skin equals more sensation.

			To test these competing hypotheses, we asked participants to rate the minds of male and female models, judging their capacities for thought, planning, and self-control (agency), and for pain, pleasure, desire, and fear (experience). These models were depicted by face only or by both face and (toned) body. As predicted by both hypotheses, people ascribed less agency to models when their bodies were visible. Importantly, a visible body also led to the increased perception of experience. Half-naked men and women were seen as more capable of sensation and emotion—consistent with typecasting.

			Another test of these hypotheses used stimuli from the portrait book XXX: 30 Porn Star Portraits by Timothy Greenfield-Sanders. This book is an experimental psychologist’s dream because it contains identically posed, identically made up, and identically lit adult film stars photographed either clothed or completely naked, enabling researchers to isolate the precise effect of nakedness. When people rated the minds of the exact same adult film star either naked or clothed, they saw the naked version as less capable of thinking but as more capable of feeling, again consistent with typecasting.31

			This nakedness-induced typecasting applies not only to men viewing women but also occurs when women view men’s bodies, when women view women’s bodies, and when men view other men’s bodies, suggesting that it might be more general than objectification. As people generally see bodies in terms of experience and not agency, it suggests that—whether you are male or female—you should wear conservative clothing on job interviews and show a little more skin if you want someone to pay attention to your experience, sexually or otherwise. Just as with those “savages” we encountered earlier, our research suggests that we animalize those who show skin. However, we should note that—as occurs often in science—some other studies provide some evidence for objectification.32 What distinguishes times when we typecast and animalize others from those when we completely objectify? One possibility is faces. In all our studies people could see the face of the target (whether they could see the person’s body or not), whereas in some other studies, people might see only the body, with the head out of the frame. If you are staring at a headless body—a collection of shapely legs, breasts, or buttocks—you might forget that it belongs to a person capable of agency or experience. Minds belong to people, not to body parts.

			Another factor that may flip the switch between typecasting and objectification is sexism, which comes in two flavors. One kind of sexism is “benevolent sexism,” which characterizes women as good and kind but also emotional and vulnerable—just as typecasting suggests. Benevolent sexism provides the basis for chivalry, putting women on a pedestal and seeking to protect them from the cruel world of men. The other kind of sexism is “hostile sexism,” which is more fitting in this chapter on the enemy. Hostile sexism holds women as incompetent and inferior but also as manipulative and conniving. When someone calls a woman a “shrew” or a “bitch,” they are exhibiting this overtly negative form of sexism.

			It appears that hostile sexism involves withholding both agency and experience from women depicted as bodies. In one study psychologists Mina Cikara, Jennifer Eberhardt, and Susan Fiske placed hostile-sexist men in an MRI scanner and showed them pictures of bikini-clad women. Normally, pictures of other people activate neural regions associated with mind perception, but these brain areas were conspicuously silent in these hostile-sexist men. Instead, the active neural regions were associated with tools, like hammers, screwdrivers, and saws: these men saw scantily clad women not as people but as something to be used and manipulated to satisfy their own desires, just as Kant suggested centuries ago.33

			Nakedness can reduce mind perception, but some people—those with autism—have trouble seeing mind even when others are full dressed. Autism affects one out of eighty-eight children and is defined by “difficulties in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication and repetitive behaviors.”34 Informally, autism has been called “mindblindness”35 because it reflects an inability to simulate36 or theorize37 the minds of others (the two processes of understanding minds we discussed in chapter 4 on the patient). Whereas people typically cannot help but see personality in pets and emotions in robots, those with autism have difficulty understanding these mental states even in other people.

			The most eminent autism researcher is Simon Baron-Cohen.* He has designed many tests for assessing this disorder, which have revealed that autism is not a matter of “on” or “off.” Instead there is a continuous dimension of impaired mind perception, called the “autism spectrum.” Those moderately high on the spectrum can understand minds with effort but often miss subtle social and conversational cues. However, people on the spectrum are often better than average at understanding complex systems such as car engines, computer programming, or philosophical logic.38 This helps to explain why holiday parties at engineering firms are often a bit daunting; few people like being trapped in a conversation about the finer points of Java versus Perl, especially when your conversational partner mistakes your dead eyes and binge drinking for signs of interest.



					 						Figure 27: An Image from the “Mind in the Eyes” Test

						What is she feeling? Encouraging, sympathetic, or thoughtful?

						S. BARON-COHEN ET AL., “THE ‘READING THE MIND IN THE EYES’ TEST REVISED VERSION: A STUDY WITH NORMAL ADULTS, AND ADULTS WITH ASPERGER SYNDROME OR HIGH-FUNCTIONING AUTISM,” JOURNAL OF CHILD PSYCHOLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 42 (2001): 241–51.



				 			 			Although those on the spectrum have an amazing ability to remember things like license plates and phone numbers, they have difficulty linking facial expressions to emotions. This is nicely illustrated by Baron-Cohen’s “Mind in the Eyes,” in which participants must label ambiguous emotional expressions. Look at the face in the picture below: is it encouraging, sympathetic, thoughtful? If you are low on the spectrum, you likely picked “thoughtful” (even though you may have second-guessed yourself). If you are higher on the spectrum, this may have posed a greater challenge. This is partially because those higher on the spectrum simply do not look people in the eyes and so are less likely to catch face-based cues to emotion.39

			Despite their difficulty in deciphering the exact nature of others’ experience, those higher on the spectrum do recognize that others generally have experience. They cannot tell you whether someone is encouraging or thoughtful, but they know that others are capable of feeling something. This was demonstrated by a study in which we (together with Anna Jenkins and Andrea Heberlein) gave participants the mind survey while also testing their location on the autism spectrum.40 We found that those higher on the autism spectrum saw less agency in adult humans, consistent with their difficulties in recognizing the intentions of others.41 However, we found no association between participants’ level of autism and their perception of experience. Those higher on the autism spectrum still recognize that others can be in pain or experience pleasure and, moreover, they care when others suffer.42

			One example of the dissociation between caring about other minds and being able to accurately gauge their contents is provided by NPR’s All Things Considered. This episode featured Kristen Finch, a woman who worked with autistic kids and whose marriage was in trouble. It seemed to her that her husband, David, was selfish and insensitive, rigid and reactive, and that he was taking her for granted. She was quickly becoming resentful of him, but one day she had an epiphany, realizing that David was uncannily similar to the autistic children with whom she worked.

			She dragged him to a computer and made him do an online test. Did he notice patterns in things? Yes. Did people comment on his unusual mannerisms and habits? Yes. Consistent with her intuitions, the test revealed that David was high on the autism spectrum (very high—scoring 155 out of 200). David cared very much about making his wife happy but his lack of mind perception denied him an intuitive grasp of how to achieve that. So he approached his wife like a complex mechanical system and made a notebook of explicit rules to follow. The marriage tips in this handbook may seem obvious to most people but not to him; for example, “Don’t change the radio station when Kristen’s singing along.”43

			Autism is one disorder of mind perception; psychopathy is another. Psychopaths are the dark cousins of those with autism; whereas those with autism are confused but caring, those with psychopathy are cold and calculating. Those with psychopathy typically can understand other minds but seldom care enough to bother. They lack empathy for others, viewing people as mere tools to achieve their own goals, and will harm others without compunction—they truly belong in this chapter on the enemy.

			Psychologist Hervey Cleckley, who documents many cases of psychopathy in his book The Mask of Sanity,44 tells the story of Gregory, a child who first came to the attention of a psychiatrist at the age of thirteen after setting fire to the local cathedral. Young Gregory had once walked into his mother’s bedroom carrying a gun, aimed it at her, and pulled the trigger. The gun malfunctioned and his mother survived to witness Gregory’s life of crime, including his theft of a police cruiser and his threatening to commit suicide by jumping off a bridge unless the police stopped pursuing him (he didn’t and was arrested). Gregory had an easy time seducing women and convincing his friends that he cared, but his mother knew that beneath his charming facade Gregory would always be an unfeeling monster.

			Psychopaths can often recognize the thoughts and feelings of others—if only to manipulate them—but they do have trouble understanding when others are in distress. Psychologist Abby Marsh has studied this phenomenon in children with antisocial behavioral patterns, including children with conduct disorder, who are likely to grow into full-blown psychopaths.45 In a typical study she presents participants with pictures featuring actors making different posed emotional expressions, such as disgust, anger, and fear. Children with conduct disorder are usually quite good at identifying various emotional expressions, except when it comes to fear, where they seem to lack insight.46

			An instructive story comes from Essi Viding, a professor at University College London who performed a similar study, asking one teenager with conduct disorder to identify the emotional state of someone who appeared distressed and afraid. The teenager said, “I don’t know what that expression is called, but I know it’s what people look like right before I stab them.” This insensitivity to the distress of others may stem from their own inability to feel this emotion. Psychopaths are notoriously calm in the face of danger, which may explain why some amount of psychopathy helps people succeed in high-pressure environments. You may not be surprised to learn that CEOs are four times more likely to qualify as psychopaths than the general population.47

			Of course, being a psychopath is not really a choice, as psychopaths are born with different brains from the rest of us. Exactly how different is not entirely clear, but there are two neural regions that seem to matter: the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) and the orbital prefrontal cortex (OPFC), which sit roughly behind your forehead and eyes, respectively. People with normal vmPFCs experience emotional twinges when contemplating doing harm or even taking risky gambles, but those with damaged vmPFCs do not—just like psychopaths.48 Likewise, people with normal OPFCs control their impulses, whereas those with damaged OPFCs act out their desires, even if antisocial—also just like psychopaths.49 The biological basis—and the relative innateness—of psychopathy poses a problem, as we typically don’t hold people responsible for innate biological differences. If you were born without fingers, no one would hold it against you if you couldn’t play the piano, so should we hold it against psychopaths that they were born without empathy?

			This question divides the legal system, with answers depending on how psychopathy is framed. One study with real judges as participants revealed that psychopaths were given more blame than nonpsychopaths, unless psychopathy was framed as a biological disorder—and then they were given less blame.50 In the terms of mind perception, the question is whether a psychopath is an agent or a patient. Certainly psychopaths are capable of acting and planning, but they are also victims of their own miswired brains.51

			Either way, psychopaths seem very different from normal people, but before you get too smug, consider the example at the beginning of the chapter, in which “normal” people perpetrate torture on innocent victims. How can someone who loves his wife, his mother, and his dog not only be comfortable with the suffering of others but be happy to cause it?

			The suffering of others typically makes us pity and protect them, but not when it confronts us too closely. When the injustice of harm is overpowering, we react by denying its injustice and seeing harm as justified and deserved.52 Take the case of rape, in which people often look to blame the victim and rationalize the crime, asking whether she was drinking or what she was wearing. People have a deep need to see the world as fair and just, and so they believe that people have gotten what they deserve, even when the harm is fundamentally undeserved.53 They want to know that terrible things won’t happen to them, that there is method in the world’s madness. With torture, a just world entails that victims deserve their suffering, and so we look for reasons to blame the victim. In the case of Mohamedou Ould Slahi, the Guantanamo Bay detainee we met at the beginning of the chapter, we imagine there must be reasons for his treatment—perhaps he hung out with the wrong people or made some poor early-life choices.

			Belief in a just world predicts that the more someone suffers, the more they will be blamed. This prediction of “more pain = more blame” directly contradicts the predictions of moral typecasting, which predicts that the more someone suffers, the less they will be blamed. Moral patients are generally not seen as moral agents, so what explains the blaming of victims? We suspected that the key difference between situations of typecasting and situations of just-world belief is whether a victim’s suffering directly relates to the observer. With rape it is often those who are most similar to the victim who blame her most. Other young women want to think, “If I simply wear sensible clothes and watch my drinking, then this could never happen to me.” Just-world belief means that even more than those who are similar to victims, those who are complicit in someone’s suffering will blame the victim. People want to believe themselves to be good people, and good people don’t harm others unless they deserve it.

			To compare the predictions of typecasting (suffering leads to perceived innocence) and those of the just-world belief (suffering leads to perceived guilt), we designed a study in which participants listened to an episode of torture. This “torture” consisted of putting the hand of a female confederate into a bucket of ice. Importantly, she reacted in one of two ways. In the nonpainful condition the confederate endured the ice bath stoically and displayed no real discomfort. In the painful condition the confederate whimpered, groaned, complained, and begged to have her hand taken out of the icy slurry.

			These two conditions were crossed with another distinction: uninvolved and complicit. In the uninvolved condition participants listened to a previous recording of the torture (either painful or nonpainful) over headphones. In the complicit condition participants first met the confederate and then sat right across the hall from her while the torture was happening, listening in on a one-way intercom.

			All participants then evaluated the guilt of the confederate, estimating how likely it was that she had cheated on some prior task. We predicted that in the uninvolved condition—when people only listened to a recording of torture—typecasting would apply, such that less blame would be assigned in the painful condition than in the nonpainful condition. This prediction was confirmed: when people were physically, temporally, and psychologically distant from the torture, they linked more pain to less guilt, just as moral typecasting suggests.

			Conversely, in the complicit condition we predicted that more pain would be linked to more blame. When participants are closely involved in the torture—and could have stopped it—there should be motivation for them to see it as justified. This prediction was also confirmed: when people were physically, temporally, and psychologically close to the torture, they linked more pain to more guilt.

			Although this lab study was done miles away from Guantanamo Bay, these psychological processes help explain the debate on torture. When people feel distant from torture, such as when reading about it in the New York Times over breakfast, they judge its victims as relatively innocent. But when people feel complicit in torture—whether they are prison guards, CIA decision makers, or simply citizens who voted for a prointerrogation government—they justify it by judging its victims as blameworthy and deserving of pain.

			The case of torture demonstrates that we are all conscientious objectors until we pull the trigger, when psychological processes engage to justify our behavior. The upshot is that people are generally unwilling to initially pull the trigger, because of the power of empathy. As we discussed in chapter 4 on the patient, empathy can be suppressed or exhausted but is often powerful even in a theater of war. In the American Civil War, it is rumored that many soldiers either fired over the heads of their enemies or just continually loaded their muskets without ever firing.

			Modern military training programs grapple with how to turn empathic people into killing machines, often instilling unquestioning obedience to authorities and a powerful sense of loyalty toward your comrades. If the commands of superiors do not move you, then you are moved by the knowledge that failing to shoot might spell death for your friends.

			Using the social psychological principles we’ve revealed in this chapter, the American military also encourages the division between “us” and “them” by using words like “haji” and “raghead” to describe Muslims. Although these terms are dehumanizing, they are often seen as a necessary survival tactic, because a moment’s hesitation about the humanity of your enemy could be the difference between your life and death.54 Finally, these training programs automate killing, bending thoughts of the enemy away from mind perception and toward reflexive aggression.

			Leaving aside perennial debates about the ethics of war, one pressing issue is how to readjust veterans to civilian life. What does a killing machine do when there is no killing to be done? Without the clear structure and goals afforded by war, many veterans find themselves adrift in civilian life. Consider one poignant scene from the Academy Award–winning movie The Hurt Locker, in which the protagonist, a soldier used to defusing bombs every day in Iraq, stands frozen in the aisle of a grocery store, pondering what kind of cereal to buy. After standing so often in the crucible of life and death, civilian life seems so inconsequential to him that he yearns to return to war, where at least he had a clear sense of purpose.

			Another issue for those who return from war is their entrenched views of the enemy. After you have been trained to dehumanize and kill foreign Muslims, it is difficult to reverse that process and see American Muslims as worthy of respect. Even Muslim servicemen have been attacked for their faith—cabdriver and U.S. Army reservist Mohamed Salim was assaulted in 2013 by a passenger who called him a “fucking Muslim” and accused him of being a jihadist. Despite the clear evidence of Salim’s patriotism, he was labeled as being “just as bad as the rest of them.”55

			Perceptions of “us versus them” also persist among civilians, especially those touched by conflict. In the Middle East you would be hard-pressed to find someone who has not—at least indirectly—been harmed by the actions of the opposition. Once someone is your enemy, they tend to stay that way forever, making rapprochement all but impossible. Nevertheless, even if conflicts cannot be solved, they can at least be soothed, and one way to reduce intergroup animosity is through common goals that require cooperation.

			In the classic Robber’s Cave study, the war between the Eagles and the Rattlers was ended by introducing superordinate goals: working together to fix a broken water fountain, pitching in to cover the cost of a movie screening, and cutting down a tree. One especially powerful unifying goal is the defeat of a common enemy, because everyone finally has something they can agree upon. If movies like Independence Day and Starship Troopers are any guide, the best way to create a harmonious human brotherhood is through the threat of alien invasion. Slight differences in skin tone seem less important when humankind is faced with extermination by ruthless space insects. Of course, once that common enemy is defeated, there is nothing stopping the revival of those suppressed sectarian differences.

			Perhaps the best route to intergroup harmony is through soap operas. Yes, soap operas. Working on the ground in Rwanda, Princeton psychologist Betsy Levy Paluck has investigated whether these daytime dramas can reduce the prejudice between the Hutus and the Tutsis. To refresh your memory, the Hutus and the Tutsis are the two largest cultural groups in Rwanda and have clashed ever since the time of colonialism. This conflict spiked in 1994, when the Rwandan government—consisting primarily of Hutus—perpetrated genocide against the Tutsi minority, killing more than half a million of them (20 percent of Rwanda’s population).56 Rwanda has since stabilized, but prejudice and distrust runs understandably deep.

			One intervention to address this animosity is Musekeweya (pronounced moo-say-kay-way-ah), or New Dawn, a radio soap opera featuring cross-group friendships and romances (like a Rwandan Romeo and Juliet) and also educational messages about the psychological roots of violence. After randomly assigning these radio soap operas to some communities, Paluck found that people in these communities were more sympathetic toward victims of genocide, more positive about the idea of intergroup cooperation, and even more favorable toward intergroup marriage.57

			Even without mass-media interventions, people can spontaneously rise above their differences and treat their enemies as friends, even on the battlefield. The Christmas Truce is a touching example of this. In December 1914, after months of bloodshed, German and British soldiers started exchanging seasonal greetings, songs, and even some gifts. This warmth increased as the temperatures cooled, and on Christmas Day many soldiers climbed out of their trenches into no-man’s-land, where together they sang carols and in one location even played a game of soccer.*58 Of course, World War I went on to claim millions of lives through brutal trench warfare and poison gas attacks, but it is reassuring to know that the flames of friendship can flicker in hurricanes of hostility. Even the enemy can sometimes be our friend.

			Minds are a matter of perception and, as we’ve seen repeatedly, these perceptions typically follow our feelings. When we feel lonely or confused, we perceive mind to help us out. When we feel love toward a cryptomind such as a pet, we perceive mind to make it human and give it moral status. In this chapter we’ve seen how the exact opposite can occur. When we dislike someone, we strip them of mind and turn them into a mere animal or machine—or just an object to be destroyed. Casting people out of the mind club robs them of their moral status and justifies our condescension and cruelty to them. Unfortunately, it is all too easy for people to become enemies, to separate into groups of us and them, if only on the basis of eye color or number estimation. Coupled with the aggression-promoting effects of resource scarcity, it is no surprise that many people live in fear of religious, political, and gang violence.

			Although it may seem like it is always “other people” who commit crimes of hatred and apathy, research reveals that it is surprisingly easy to turn any of us—even you, gentle reader—into a weapon of cruelty. We hope that after reading this chapter you will listen a bit harder for the sounds of mind in those who seem different from you. But sometimes even listening will do us no good—some minds are completely silent.





Chapter 6


		 			THE SILENT





In 1986 a young woman and her husband moved to Florida to start new jobs. The husband was a restaurant manager, and the young woman worked at an insurance firm. They led normal lives, but the young woman would obsess over her weight. She would often drink large amounts of water and iced tea to keep her feeling full without the calories of food. Unfortunately, drinking too much water and iced tea can dilute your electrolyte levels and cause hypokalemia—extremely low levels of potassium—which, in turn, can cause cardiac arrest. In 1990 the husband came home to find his wife facedown and unconscious, without a pulse. Paramedics rushed her to the hospital, where doctors quickly restarted her heart, but by the time it had resumed beating, she had suffered permanent brain damage. The young woman—though technically alive—never woke up from her coma, and after a year of unresponsiveness her diagnosis was changed to persistent vegetative state (PVS).

			The patient’s name was Terri Schiavo, and her case caused a hurricane of controversy. Unlike the typical patients we explored in chapter 4, Terri was completely silent and all but unresponsive. After a number of unsuccessful attempts at rehabilitation, ranging from occupational and speech therapy to experimental brain implants and simple walks in the park, it became clear to Michael Schiavo—Terri’s husband—that her vegetative state was permanent.

			Terri was kept alive only by a feeding tube that skipped her unresponsive throat and delivered nutrients straight to her stomach. In 1993 Michael signed a DNR, a “do not resuscitate” order, which meant that if Terri stopped breathing, doctors would not try to revive her. Five years later Michael petitioned to have the feeding tube removed, a move opposed by her parents, who were convinced both that Terri would recover and that euthanasia was immoral.

			Michael argued that Terri would not have wanted to be kept alive in this state, and doctors agreed that recovery would be extremely unlikely. The dispute between Michael and Terri’s parents pulled in state and federal judges, legislators, and lobbying groups. One side argued for Terri’s right to die and the other for her right to stay alive. As in other debates about life and death, liberals argued in favor of the right to choose, whereas conservatives argued for the right to life.

			The case peaked when then-President George W. Bush signed a law transferring the dispute to the Supreme Court, which upheld the previous ruling to let Terri die. This was not the verdict he was looking for, however, and his brother—the governor of Florida, Jeb Bush—planned on disobeying the court order. The only thing stopping Jeb Bush was a Florida judge who had charged the local sheriffs with guarding Terri while she died. As intervening would have meant a fight of force between the sheriff and the National Guard, Jeb Bush relented; fifteen years after falling into cardiac arrest, Terri finally died.

			Whether you see Terri’s death as merciful or merciless depends upon what kind of mind you believe she had. Terri was undoubtedly a medical patient, but was she a true moral patient with an inner life? Those who believe that Terri was relatively mindless see her death as a kindness. From their point of view, letting her die was simply allowing an unfeeling mass of biological cells to stop functioning. Conversely, those who believe that Terri was a relatively mindful moral patient see her death as cruelty. Although her mental capacities may have been masked by her damaged body, they believe that Terri was still “in there.” As we have repeatedly seen, mind is the key to moral rights, but in vegetative patients its perception is especially ambiguous.

			Typically we assess other human minds through conversation, such as in the Turing test. However, not everything can talk, and this silence is what makes cryptominds like robots and animals so ambiguous. If only cows could say, “Please don’t eat me!” then we would know they have minds and would stop eating them—or would at least feel much guiltier about doing so. While we are well accustomed to languageless animals and machines, we expect humans to talk, and it is very strange when they cannot. Without verbal abilities, how can we know whether other people belong in the mind club? Is a PVS patient a vulnerable feeler, a thinking doer, or merely a collection of muscle twitches and nerve pulses?

			Silence can be problematic for understanding agency, because we often discuss our future plans and past deeds, but it is especially problematic for experience. Actions can be externally observed, but feelings and sensations must be put into words to be understood by others. Was Terri Schiavo afraid or hopeful? Was she angry or calm? These are questions to which we can never know the answers. The most extreme kind of silence is suggested by a famous philosophical thought experiment—the brain in a vat. Imagine that your brain—i.e., your mind—is placed in a vat, along with all the nutrients it needs to survive. While resting there, you might have a rich mental life, filled with lush landscapes of imagination, but without some way of communication how would anyone else ever know about it?

			More than any other entity the silent represent an interesting counterpoint to the philosophical zombie that we accused your mother of being in chapter 1. A philosophical zombie is someone who can talk but who ultimately lacks conscious experience, whereas the silent may still have experience, despite being unable to communicate it. Without the typical cues to mind, how do we decide whether a silent entity has a mind?

			Historically the answer often came down to a heartbeat. Ancient (and not-so-ancient) peoples long struggled with what separated the living from the dead. The heart is the only organ that pulses rhythmically and is immediately essential for life. You can live for some time with a pierced liver or a punctured lung, but harm your heart and you’re soon dead. This is likely why the heart was seen as the seat of feeling and cognition; one of the Latin words for heart is animus, which is the spirit or animating force of the human body, or what we might call “the mind.”

			Grounding life in the heart provided a sharp line between the living and the dead: if you had a heartbeat, then you were living, and if you didn’t, then you weren’t. Of course, even with this criterion people still made mistakes. If the heart was beating too feebly to detect, then death was often pronounced prematurely; as burial preparations were being made for these “corpses,” they would sit up and ask about all the digging.1 More gruesome to consider are those who came alive an hour or two later, trapped in a coffin six feet underground.

			The heart was so identified with the mind that it was often thought to be imbued with power even after the rest of the body was cast aside. In Edgar Allan Poe’s “The Tell-Tale Heart”2 the protagonist is driven mad by the imagined heartbeat of a man he has just murdered, and in many stories3 consuming a person’s heart earns you their power. Despite this imagined power, we now know the heart to be a mere machine, if a stunningly reliable one. A person’s heart can not only be made to beat artificially through a pacemaker but can also be completely replaced with an artificial heart. In fact, almost all your organs can be simulated by a machine (e.g., kidney dialysis) or replaced with another version, whether synthetically constructed or naturally donated. The only organ that we cannot bolster with a machine or substitute entirely is the brain. The brain is essential for both life and mind, and so current legal definitions of life are tied to brain function—someone is dead when they are “brain-dead.”4

			The mind is obviously linked to the brain. At the coarsest level, if you were to remove someone’s entire brain, they would certainly die. At a finer-grained level, removing parts of people’s brains also reduces their minds, such as in the famous case of the railway worker Phineas Gage. After losing a cylinder of his brain, the once kind and pious family man turned into a drinking, sex-crazed, authority-hating thunderstorm of a man, prone to fights and cruelty.

			Losing even more mind can make you not violent but gentle. Consider the lobotomy, a medical procedure used to reduce mental illness for which Portuguese neurologist António Moniz won the 1949 Nobel Prize in medicine. To perform this procedure, one need only slip an ice pick behind the eyes and into the brain and then wiggle it around until the frontal lobes are thoroughly muddled.5

			Without these brain regions intact, people become calm and docile and also relatively incapable of independent functioning, initiative, and inhibition.6 In the words of a prominent doctor, “through lobotomy an insane person is changed into an idiot.”7 Thankfully, not all those who suffered lobotomies are “idiots”: Howard Dully, the boy pictured in figure 28, led a remarkably productive life and cowrote the fascinating memoir My Lobotomy. Nevertheless, the general correspondence between brain and mind is undeniable.



			 					 						Figure 28: Depiction of Lobotomy

						A twelve-year-old boy undergoes prefrontal lobotomy in 1960.



			 				 			 			The link between brain and mind can help inform decisions regarding the silent. In the case of Terri Schiavo, autopsies revealed that she had suffered massive brain damage,8 perhaps providing some vindication to those who advocated for her right to die. But even damaged brains can think and feel, and so questions of both brain and mind turn on nuance.

			To get a more detailed understanding of the mind, researchers study not only static brain structures but also the dynamic patterns of neuronal activation. These so-called functional techniques can assess thinking and feeling more directly because they examine how brain cells act in different situations, such as when trying to read, when listening to scary sounds, or even when perceiving the minds of others. Plus, functional analyses give researchers pretty pictures of colored brains, which lends them scientific weight in the eyes of the public.9

			Two of the most popular functional techniques are functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG). fMRI relies upon the simple fact that active cells, whether in the brain or in the kneecap, use up oxygen in the blood. The harder a cell is working, the more oxygen it consumes from the blood, so if you can measure regional blood oxygenation, you can observe brain activity. However, measuring brain-cell oxygenation requires sticking heads inside a very powerful magnet, typically with a field strength of at least three teslas. For comparison, three teslas is one thousand times stronger than a refrigerator magnet but not powerful enough to levitate a frog (which would take sixteen teslas). Nevertheless, a magnetic field at that strength will tear your smartphone out of your hand and tug suggestively on underwire bras.

			Magnetic fields are useful for brain imaging because oxygen-rich blood has different magnetic properties from oxygen-poor blood (oxygen binds to hemoglobin, which contains iron, which is magnetic). By looking at the BOLD (blood-oxygenation-level-dependent) signal in a powerful magnet, researchers can detect where fresh, oxygen-rich blood is being sent. This technique gives a fairly precise spatial location of brain activity (within one or two millimeters) during tasks. For example, when people think about the thoughts and intentions of others (i.e., perceive minds), fMRI reveals activations in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex,10 lateral parietal cortex, and medial parietal cortex.11 We can use these maps of brain activity to reason about what silent minds might be doing. If a PVS patient shows similar brain activity to that of a healthy person, it hints at someone “in there” and recommends the patient as a mind club member with moral standing.

			As a brain-scanning device, fMRI is very useful, but it has two main limitations. First, it is costly: an hour in a scanner typically runs about eight hundred dollars, which means only the richest kids get fMRI-themed birthday parties. Second, although fMRI has good spatial resolution (i.e., location identification), it has poor temporal resolution (i.e., time-course identification). Blood takes a few seconds to flow to brain structures, which is too long to reveal the dynamics of many mental events.

			Electroencephalography (EEG) is another brain-imaging technique that can assess these temporal dynamics; it does so by measuring the brain’s electrical activity through a network of electrodes affixed to the scalp. Although the brain does not produce a lot of electricity—you couldn’t power a television simply by thinking hard—firing neurons release electrically charged particles, causing a current. Just as the current that powers your appliances runs at certain cycles (in the United States it cycles back and forth between positive and negative current at sixty times a second, or sixty hertz), a functioning brain also has certain electrical cycles.



					 						Figure 29: An EEG Electrode Cap

						EEG offers the ability to record “brain waves.”



				 			 			When you plot these up-and-down cycles over time, they look like waves, so one cycle is called alpha waves (8–13 Hz) and others include beta waves (14–40 Hz), delta waves (1–3 Hz), and theta waves (4–7 Hz).12 Alpha waves are the medium-sized waves that characterize wakeful relaxation, beta waves are fast waves that are characteristic of concentration and problem solving, and delta waves are slower and observed during periods of deep sleep or uninterrupted meditation. As these brain cycles correlate with mental states, EEG is usually the method of choice when investigating cryptominds, and it has proved especially useful in examining silent people with disorders of consciousness such as coma, vegetative states, and sleep.

			Sleep? Like vegetative states, sleep is a state of silence and altered consciousness. If two people—one sleeping and one in a vegetative state—were next to each other, you would be hard-pressed to tell the difference at a glance. Both would have their eyes closed, be breathing rhythmically, and be unable to speak; the main difference would be found in the mental functioning behind their closed lids.

			When people sleep, there is a wealth of neural activity in their brains.13 As you fall asleep, alpha waves of awakeness give way to the lower-frequency theta waves of light sleep. If you are woken up during theta waves, you likely will not even realize you were asleep. As your sleep deepens, your brain activity is characterized by delta waves—big, slow, rolling waves—and it becomes harder to wake you up. During the delta stage of sleep, the body repairs itself and flushes out neurological waste products. If you manage to wake someone up during this stage, they are typically groggy and disoriented.14

			The final stage of sleep, called rapid eye movement or REM, is actually quite similar to wakefulness in terms of brain waves; there are alpha and beta waves but also lots of crazy eye movement. Most important from the perspective of mind, REM is when dreaming occurs.15 Whether you are speaking in front of a large crowd sans pants, falling to your death, or making out with your old high school crush, it all happens during REM.

			The vividness of dreams is one reason it is hard to label vegetative patients as “mindless.” We know that if we were lying with our eyes closed, we would be experiencing the rich inner life of dreams. The idea that coma patients are simply dreaming is a frequent topic in literature and film. One especially clever take on this idea was in the Canadian television show The Odyssey, which captivated one of your authors (Kurt) as a child.

			In this show a boy falls from a tree house and into a coma. While in the coma, he finds himself in a parallel world devoid of grown-ups and ruled by a fifteen-year-old militaristic dictator. The boy spends three seasons battling the secretive and ominous forces of this dictator (who, in a nod to Kafka, lives in “the tower”) and trying to regain consciousness and return home to his family and friends. Even if you’ve never seen this show, its theme has universal appeal—we like to think of people in comas or other disordered states as simply trying to get home through an odyssey of inner life. Whether people in these disordered states actually have an inner life is a question neuroscience can help answer.

			EEG reveals that not all states of silence are the same. At maximum consciousness is our normal awake self, and one large step below is sleep. Sandwiched between awake and asleep is the “minimally conscious state,” in which people are aware of stimuli but little else. Minimally conscious patients can follow a pointer on a screen but are unable to complete purposeful behavior; in other words, they have experience but not agency. This state is characterized by slowed theta and delta waves and by weaker brain activity than during wakefulness, and it is usually induced by some kind of traumatic head injury, just like the coma, which is one step further down the consciousness ladder.

			Like a minimally conscious state, a coma state is characterized by slowed theta and delta waves, but also by more intermittent delta rhythms, and generally weaker EEG signals.16 Patients typically recover from a coma after a week or two, which makes it an ideal plot device in television and movies. In a coma you can be out of commission just long enough for your fiancée to fall in love with your brother, despite the fact that she is not really your fiancée at all and, in fact, you have never really met. This is the plot of the movie While You Were Sleeping (starring Sandra Bullock and Bill Pullman), a title that emphasizes the intuitive link between comas and sleeping.*

			Below comas are vegetative states, which are characterized by significantly more brain damage and poorer overall functioning. In these states vegetative functions, like breathing and swallowing, remain intact, but people are unresponsive to stimuli and unable to complete voluntary behavior.17 Vegetative states are further categorized by how long they have lasted. After four weeks, patients are classified as being in a “persistent vegetative state” and have a significantly reduced chance of ever recovering. Patients in vegetative states may still look like they’re sleeping, but they’re not—and they’re not dreaming either. Researchers at the University of Wisconsin at Madison have used EEG to compare brain functioning in healthy, minimally conscious, and vegetative-state patients. They found that the behavioral signs of sleep (e.g., eyes closed, relaxed muscles) co-occurred with sleep-related brain-wave patterns in minimally conscious patients but not in PVS patients.18



			 			 					 						Figure 30: Chart of Disordered Conscious States

						Each state involves different EEG patterns.



			 			 			Patients in vegetative states, however, do appear to have a neural response to their own names. A study conducted by European researchers recited a list of names to participants, who included normal adults, minimally conscious patients, and vegetative patients.19 Using EEG, the researchers found that normal adults showed a special neural reaction when their own name was mentioned and—after a significant delay—so did both the minimally conscious and vegetative patients. It is seductive to imagine that these patients were consciously recognizing their names, but this neural response could be completely unconscious, representing only a tenacious mental reflex.

			The important question across these states is whether the minds of patients continue to exist, or at least whether they have minds that can be recovered. Is there someone home in there—even if they are trapped in the basement—or have they left to travel abroad, never to return? To address this question, researchers examine not only the brains of patients but also their behaviors, testing whether they interact meaningfully with the world. Do patients respond to the touch of their doctors and their loved ones? Do they care who wins the World Series?

			In 2009 the Phillies returned to the World Series, hoping to win back-to-back titles. One unlikely fan who followed their quest for the pennant was Terri Schiavo—or so it seemed. In a video clip taken in October of that year, Terri lies in her hospital bed while a nearby radio broadcasts the game. During what was to be the final play of the final game of the National League Championship Series against the Dodgers, the announcer calmly starts describing a Phillies pitch and subsequent hit by a Dodger, but as the ball climbs high into the air, he becomes more and more excited—it’s a pop fly. The crowd explodes as the fly ball drops into the center fielder’s glove, and the announcer exclaims that the Phillies are returning to the World Series.

			Back in her hospital bed, Terri starts to lift her head, turns it toward the radio, and opens her eyes widely. To all appearances it seems that Terri is excited about the Phillies’ victory—at least, that is the explanation we would give for that behavior in a healthy adult human. Did Terri have a mind capable of understanding the baseball victory, or was something else going on? Perhaps she was just excited by the excitement, in an unconscious contagion of arousal.

			Whether vegetative patients can interact with the world is essential to their diagnosis. Terri Schiavo was diagnosed as being in a vegetative state when doctors realized that she had “absence of voluntary action” and the “inability to communicate or interact purposefully.” In the parlance of mind perception, she lacked agency, the ability to impose her intention onto the outside world,20 but the Phillies clip gives us pause. Isn’t this a clear example of mindful behavior? It certainly feels compelling, but one of psychology’s lessons is that appearances can often be deceiving. People can perceive complex minds in behaviors that actually have simpler explanations, such as a horse doing math.

			This particular horse was named Hans and earned the nickname “Clever Hans” for his uncanny numerical abilities. His trainer, Wilhelm von Osten, would ask him a series of math problems, such as ,* and Hans would cleverly clop out the answer with his front hoof, earning himself a carrot in the process. Audiences were amazed at this ability, and Hans quickly became a celebrity, but a psychologist named Oskar Pfungst needed further proof. His experimental method was straightforward: he placed a sheet between the trainer and Hans, so that Hans could still hear the math question but couldn’t get any other cues from von Osten. With this intervention Hans’s performance fell apart and he was no better than your average horse, which is to say, terrible.

			Why did this manipulation destroy Hans’s ability? Did he have nightmares about sheets, for which he needed his trainer to comfort him? It turns out he did need his trainer, but not for comfort. What was truly clever about Hans was that he had learned to associate body language with clicking his hoof. When von Osten asked a question, he would lean forward expectantly, and the horse would start stepping. Once the correct answer was reached, von Osten would rock back on his heels, satisfied, and the horse would take this as a cue to stop stepping.21 So Hans was clever, but in a different way from what people thought.

			Whether PVS patients’ behavior is “clever” or reflexive depends upon whether it responds flexibly to changing task demands. Clever Hans always clopped out the same answer based on body language, regardless of the specific math question. Do PVS patients show more flexibility? In one study researchers in Tel Aviv addressed this question with fMRI scans of four vegetative states (VS) patients who looked at pictures of strangers, friends, family members, and themselves. The researchers examined brain regions tied to face recognition and emotion, since healthy people both recognize and react to pictures of their friends and family and of themselves.22 All VS patients showed activation in these brain regions, and the activation was strongest in those patients who would eventually recover. But is this contingent behavior conscious? Membership in the mind club depends on actually “experiencing” various experiences. As we saw in the beginning of chapter 2 on animals, even plants react to themselves and their environment,23 and they certainly don’t have minds worthy of our concern.

			A research team led by British neuroscientist Adrian Owen investigated the mind of a twenty-three-year-old woman injured in a car accident. After five months of treatment, the woman met all criteria for a vegetative state: her reflexes were still intact, but she produced no voluntary or intentional motor behaviors and couldn’t follow a moving stimulus with her eyes. She did, however, have intact sleep and wake cycles, and EEGs revealed the presence of some alpha and beta waves, both of which are characteristic of conscious thought. The researchers developed a clever task using fMRI to determine if she could intentionally direct her thinking.

			They asked her to imagine one of two scenarios. The first was walking around her house and the second was playing tennis, which she did often before the accident. An fMRI revealed that her brain activity during these tasks was indistinguishable from that of neurotypical people: when asked to imagine moving around her house, her “navigation” areas were activated, and when asked to imagine playing tennis, her “arm motions” areas were activated.24 Although she couldn’t talk, this young woman was responding flexibly to the researchers—almost like a conversation, she was speaking through her brain scans. The researchers concluded that she was imagining the scenarios vividly enough that it counted as purposeful behavior and hinted at a thriving inner life. She wasn’t a vegetative patient at all but was instead locked in.

			Locked-in states are very different from vegetative states, and we will begin our exploration of them with a simple question: how many blinks does it take to write a book? The answer is 200,000, the number of blinks it took Jean-Dominique Bauby to write his memoir Le scaphandre et le papillon, or The Diving Bell and the Butterfly. The more expedient choice would have been to write it, but Bauby lacked that option. On December 8, 1995, he suffered a stroke, and after twenty days in a coma he awoke to find himself a prisoner of his own body. He was fully aware of his surroundings and himself; he could see, listen, and understand; he could dream, think, and feel; but he couldn’t move a muscle. That’s not completely true, of course, as he could move one muscle—his left eyelid. Otherwise, he was fully locked in.

			Bauby was a writer (he was editor of the magazine Elle when he suffered his stroke) and he wanted to tell the world about his experience, so with the help of his assistant, Claude Mendibil, he wrote the 139-page book one letter at a time. The assistant would simply say the letters in order of their frequency, which in French would be E, S, A, R, I, and so on. When the correct letter was reached, Bauby would blink and they would move on to the next one. If you haven’t read the book, it is a poignant picture of being trapped in one’s own body state. Even the title is touching: his useless body is the diving bell, an impenetrable steel casing that sits alone at the bottom of the ocean, but his spirit—his mind—is a butterfly, as light and free as ever. Unfortunately, Bauby did not live to see the success of his book or the host of awards that its film adaptation won, as he died from pneumonia three days after the book was published. We can only hope that his butterfly still flutters somewhere.

			Locked-in states are exactly as they sound. Victims finds themselves confined to the prison of their obstinate body, which refuses to obey the mind’s directives. It is the most severe kind of paralysis. Rather than paraplegia (paralysis of two limbs) or quadriplegia (paralysis of all four limbs), those suffering from locked-in states are unable to move more than one or two muscles. In terms of the two dimensions of mind, experience is usually unaffected, but agency is extremely curtailed. Locked-in states are feeling without doing; they are input with no output.

			Locked-in states can arise gradually, precipitated by diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),* which involves a progressive loss of motor neurons connecting the brain to the muscles. Stephen Hawking is one person who suffers from ALS, and over the course of many years he has become almost entirely paralyzed, except for a few small movements. He currently speaks through a voice synthesizer attached to a wheelchair that he controls with his cheek muscle. For evidence of the preservation of one’s mind in this state, one need look only at Hawking’s contributions to theoretical physics and mathematics, including his book A Brief History of Time, which remained on the Sunday Times bestseller list for more than four and a half years.

			As ALS progresses, the key challenge is to find ways to preserve agency along with experience. As walking becomes difficult, you can use a cane, a walker, and then a wheelchair. Helpers can cook your meals and dress you, and friends and family can pitch in for everything else. But this reliance on others comes with a psychological cost—as we saw in chapter 4 on patients, relying so much on others can breed feelings of powerlessness and resentment. These feelings are reinforced by a cruel trick of the disease: while motor neurons are dying, sensory neurons are still alive and well, meaning that ALS patients can continue to feel discomfort as their body twists and buckles, without being able to do anything about it. The only saving grace of ALS is that often the patient’s voice is preserved until almost the very end, allowing him to speak and connect with others.

			ALS not only represents a powerful example of locked-in states but also has personal significance for your authors. Dan was diagnosed with this disease in November 2010 and passed away from it in July 2013. Initially, we all believed he was suffering from the “slow-progressing” variety and had at least five years to go, but unfortunately nature chose to ignore that lenient diagnosis.

			Dan often spoke to others about the difficulty of living with the disease and his looming mortality, but with your other author (Kurt) he spoke mostly about positive aspects of his new life. His diagnosis brought an endless stream of friends and family to his house, and time for thought, reflection, and deep personal connection. He took joy in being able to see the narrative arc of his life from beginning to end, and to live his final days without regret or reluctance. For the sake of maintaining his appetite, he also had an unlimited supply of marijuana pills, and though he refused to share them with his coauthor, he appeared to greatly enjoy their predictable side effects.

			We spent many great afternoons talking about mind perception and morality and looking out the picture window at the little sailboats on the lake below. Kurt always wanted to ask Dan about ALS but was too afraid to ask and was having too much fun talking about science. But other people have written eloquently about living with ALS, such as Tony Judt, who was an esteemed thinker, writer, and professor of European history. The excerpt below is from his essay “Night” and describes the experience of greeting the morning after spending the night awake, alone, and motionless on his back.


I wake up in exactly the position, frame of mind, and state of suspended despair with which I went to bed—which in the circumstances might be thought a considerable achievement. . . . This cockroach-like existence is cumulatively intolerable even though on any given night it is perfectly manageable. “Cockroach” is of course an allusion to Kafka’s Metamorphosis, in which the protagonist wakes up one morning to discover that he has been transformed into an insect. The point of the story is as much the responses and incomprehension of his family as it is the account of his own sensations, and it is hard to resist the thought that even the best-meaning and most generously thoughtful friend or relative cannot hope to understand the sense of isolation and imprisonment that this disease imposes upon its victims.25

			Living with ALS is a heart-wrenching ordeal, but at least most patients, like Tony Judt, are not fully silent. More troublesome are cases of complete silence, where people have progressed past twitching and blinking. With them, the only route to communication is direct readouts of brain states using fMRI or EEG. As we saw earlier, one group of researchers inferred the presence of one woman’s mind by having her imagine playing tennis or navigating her house, but the trick is to harness these scans to enable flexible communication. How do you turn tennis and navigation into conversation? People must control their brain states, using them as “words.”

			In the case of tennis and navigation, you could think about playing tennis to indicate yes and house navigation to indicate no. This sounds easy in principle but is extremely hard in practice. Thinking of tennis may have some detectable neural correlates, but thinking of tennis as a proxy for yes may have very different correlates. Moreover, these neural signatures are very noisy and often detectable only after dozens and dozens of trials. This would require someone being asked the same question again and again and each time thinking about tennis or navigation. Only then might we be able to discern their answer, after complicated analyses of fMRI data. Hardly the kind of back-and-forth we expect in conversation—and never mind that MRI magnets are amazingly expensive and incredibly loud.

			But people can—if only indirectly—control their brain states in real time. Researchers at MIT put chronic-pain patients into an fMRI magnet and connected their brain activity with an image of a flame, which glowed brighter as their pain (and neural activation) increased. Patients were instructed to mentally try to dampen or extinguish it, and seemed able to control their “pain flame”—and feel less pain as a result.26

			If healthy people can control their brain states, perhaps locked-in patients can do the same. This was the hope of Professor Niels Birbaumer, who traveled to South America with an EEG machine to help Mr. Elías Musiris Chahín communicate with his family. Mr. Chahín was a Peruvian casino magnate who was fully locked in by advanced ALS. Professor Birbaumer hooked up Mr. Chahín to the EEG machine, which was connected to a monitor showing a floating ball, a device Birbaumer called the Thought Translation Device (TTD). Some brain states were programmed to move the ball up, and some were programmed to move the ball down; the trick was for Mr. Chahín to learn to consciously control these brain states and hence the movements of the ball.

			If the ball went up, Mr. Chahín would be saying yes, and if the ball went down, he would be saying no. At first the ball just moved randomly, even when Mr. Chahín was repeatedly asked the same question, but one day he flawlessly spelled out his entire name. Despite his immobilized body, his mind still appeared to be intact.27 In the few years since Professor Birbaumer began working with Mr. Chahín, brain-scanning techniques have advanced in sophistication, and it is hoped that they will soon allow locked-in patients to have richer conversations—patients like Erik Ramsey.

			On November 5, 1999, Ramsey was returning home from the movies with a friend. Ramsey was in the passenger seat and his friend was driving well above the speed limit. Their Camaro struck a U-turning minivan, flipping the vehicle and trapping Ramsey inside. The injuries were catastrophic and the pain unbearable—but the worst came when Ramsey developed a blood clot in a section of his brain stem called the pons.* Ramsey woke up to find himself unable to move any part of his body save his eyes, which could be moved only to look up or down. In what could be called a blessing or a curse, Ramsey remained fully conscious.

			The plan for Ramsey was more ambitious than Birbaumer’s approach with Mr. Chahín. With Ramsey the goal was actual language—the researchers believed they could insert wires into Ramsey’s brain that would allow him to spell out words on his computer, similar to Birbaumer’s system. Until about 2004 this actually worked. Then one day Ramsey had a bad bout of pneumonia, and his ability to spell disappeared, along with his ability to communicate beyond a simple yes or no. They had to find a new system, and what they developed is remarkable: Ramsey thinks about making simple sounds, such as vowels, and the wires from his brain to the computer translate this activity into sound. Slowly his inner voice is finding a way to express itself, even if he is currently limited to simple vowel sounds.28

			These neural-interface techniques hold much promise, especially for those who descend slowly into locked-in states, such as through ALS. However, many people become locked in suddenly through a stroke or accident, and their lack of movement is assumed to reflect a lack of mind. Without the appearance of agency, brain-scanning techniques are seldom used, and patients are diagnosed as comatose or vegetative and left to lie forever in hospital beds. Take the case of Julia Tavalaro, who at age thirty-two suffered two strokes and a brain hemorrhage. Lying motionless, she was assumed to be in a vegetative state for six years until her speech therapist, Arlene Kratt, noticed the trace of a smile after the telling of a joke. This small expression proved to be her salvation. With attention from doctors and therapists, she learned to communicate with eye movements (like Bauby) and control a wheelchair with cheek movements (like Hawking). More impressive, Tavalaro also published a collection of her poems, all communicated using a switch she could touch with a small movement of her cheek.29

			Communicating with others may be lifesaving to some locked-in patients, but others simply want to die. One such patient is Tony Nicklinson, a British man who suffered a stroke and found himself almost fully locked in. Although he could communicate by blinking, he found his life so frustrating and empty that his one great wish was to be allowed to die. Unfortunately for Nicklinson, suicide—like getting dressed or going to the bathroom—is an action that requires some amount of agency, if only to overdose on painkillers. Without any of his own agency, he needed someone else’s help, and so he petitioned the British government to allow him assistance. They had to decide whether this would be suicide or murder.

			In a statement prepared for the court, Nicklinson described his daily life:


My life can be summed up as dull, miserable, demeaning, undignified and intolerable. . . . It is a misery created by the accumulation of lots of things which are minor in themselves but, taken together, ruin what’s left of my life. Things like . . . constant dribbling; having to be hoisted everywhere; loss of independence . . . particularly toileting and washing, in fact all bodily functions (by far the hardest thing to get used to); having to forgo favourite foods . . . having to wait until 10:30 to go to the toilet. . . . In extreme circumstances I have gone in the chair, and have sat there until the carers arrived at the normal time.30

			The idea of consensual killing has always posed an ethical problem, because it represents a slippery slope. We might sympathize with Nicklinson, but what about the case of Bernd Brandes, who allowed himself to be eaten by German cannibal Armin Meiwes? Brandes was certainly happy to die—before he bled to death, he and Meiwes shared a meal of Brandes’s cooked genitals—but is the simple wish to die sufficient justification for being killed? Is cannibalism okay when the victim expresses a desire to be eaten and have his kneecaps used as fertilizer, as Brandes suggested?31 In their original decision the German courts wrote that Meiwes had no “base motives” and therefore was not guilty of murder, although he did get eight and a half years for manslaughter.32

			Of course, Brandes—unlike Nicklinson—could have killed himself. The British court’s decision on Nicklinson’s case followed precedent, ruling that it was illegal for even a suffering, locked-in patient to be killed. One justice commented, “No one could fail to be deeply moved by the terrible predicament faced by these men struck down in their prime and facing a future bereft of hope . . . but the short answer is that . . . any change [in assisted suicide laws] would need the most carefully structured safeguards which only Parliament can deliver.”33

			What was Nicklinson to do? The court forbade assisted suicide, but it couldn’t force him to eat—he still had control over his ability to swallow. Immediately after receiving the court’s verdict, Nicklinson vowed to stop eating his spoon-fed meals. In his already weakened state, this lack of nutrition soon led him to catch pneumonia, and only days later he finally got his wish.34 Whether you believe Nicklinson’s death was a merciful release from suffering or a tragic loss of life likely depends upon how you imagine yourself in a locked-in state.

			Trying to predict how much you would like or dislike the experience of a different state is called affective forecasting. Affective forecasting is exactly what people do when they make statements such as “I would rather die than be locked in” or “My life would be much better if I won the lottery” or “Giving birth won’t hurt enough to need an epidural.” In affective forecasting, people in one state (e.g., health) imagine what it would be like to be in a different state (e.g., locked in). Unfortunately, our imaginations are unreliable guides to altered states, which means that most people fail to accurately predict their future feelings.*

			In a classic demonstration people imagined their happiness after hypothetically winning the lottery or becoming paraplegic. Unsurprisingly, people believed that lottery winning would make them ecstatic and that paraplegia would make them miserable. They were half right: immediately after these respective events, people who actually experience them are indeed much happier or sadder than usual, but within a year they basically return to their pre-event happiness level.35 This means that lottery winners are often no happier than those who are paralyzed from the waist down. “Impossible!” you may scoff, believing with cold certainty that gaining millions of dollars is better than losing the use of your legs.

			While it is true that your imagined experiences of these events are vastly different—sitting in your yacht drinking piña coladas versus sitting alone in a wheelchair—it turns out that the actual experiences of these events are not so different. There are many bad things in lottery winning and many good things in paraplegia. Winners of the lottery have to contend with scheming family members, the resentment of their friends, the loss of meaning in their lives after quitting their jobs, and the endless parade of strangers trying to use them for their money. Paraplegics still have their friends and family, and misfortune serves to strengthen social bonds, allows people to find meaning in their lives, and even helps them find God.36

			Faulty affective forecasting often leads people to overestimate the misery of medical conditions. You may think that it would be better to be dead than to be both blind and deaf, but Helen Keller had these two disabilities, and not only did she want to keep living but she lived an incredibly rich and important life. You may think it would be better to be dead than to be locked in, but locked-in patients—Nicklinson excepted—seldom advocate for suicide. On the other hand, it is very difficult to simulate experiences such as pain and discomfort, which may make locked-in states worse than what we imagine.

			In an everyday example, pregnant women often wish to have a natural birth, despite the imagined pain, but when the actual pain of labor arrives, many are quick to abandon that wish and go for the relief of an epidural. So it seems that the only rule when it comes to understanding the experiences of different states is that we seldom truly understand them. The inaccuracy of affective forecasting is ultimately rooted in the problem of other minds, which we introduced in chapter 1. You can ultimately never fully understand other minds, even when that “other” mind is your future self.

			Your inability to accurately predict your future experiences is okay concerning giving birth or even paraplegia, because you can decide in the moment and communicate your wishes. In contrast, when you are silent, you end up being bound by your past wishes or the wishes of your family.

			Imagine you had a loved one who suddenly suffered a massive stroke and showed no signs of agency but some ambiguous signs of experience via an fMRI scanner. They could be locked in, or they could be in a vegetative state. What would you choose for them? Would you keep them alive in case they could think and sense the world, if only from the solitary confinement of their broken body? Or would you allow them to die, freeing them from suffering and snuffing out any lingering experience they might have? Many people are terrified to make such a stark choice about life and death, wishing instead that the patient in question had given some hint to their wishes through a living will.

			Living wills—also called advance directives—are similar to normal wills in that they communicate your wishes when you are no longer able to do so. Rather than applying after death, living wills apply after extreme misfortune, such as strokes, accidents, and neurological diseases. One example of a living will guiding decisions is told by Dr. Pauline Chen in an article she wrote in the New York Times. Her father-in-law woke up with coldness in his right arm. It was caused by severe clots in major arteries blocking blood flow to his arm and major organs. Surgery was a possibility, but its chance of success was small, and even if it was successful he would have been condemned to years of suffering and hospital visits. Chen’s family struggled with the decision, but her father-in-law had made his wishes known in a living will—he wanted to die.

			Despite the misgivings of the family, her father-in-law died happily, surrounded by those he loved—a decision Chen seems at peace with.37 However, even when there are living wills advocating death, the family’s wishes to keep patients on life support often prevail. Technically, the living will should take precedence, but with the patient silent and the family threatening to sue for malpractice (or even press charges for murder), doctors are often quick to capitulate and maintain treatment. Because of moral concerns, some hospitals even keep patients alive when the family agrees with the will’s decision to cease treatment.38

			Knowing about the inaccuracy of affective forecasting might also give us pause about relying on living wills, as the wishes of the healthy past self may not be the same as those of the locked-in future self. Imagine that at age eighteen you make your friend promise to kill you if you ever buy a minivan. Twenty years later you have forgotten this pledge and lost touch with your friend, and so you are surprised to see him arrive at your house with a handgun after you buy a family-sized automobile. Would he be excused for murdering you? Unlikely. The courts recognize that people can change their minds. One way to interpret “change their minds” is to say that the same mind merely shifted its opinion, but the more interesting way is to say that the mind actually changed—it’s a different mind than it was in the first place. This more literal sense of “mind changing” suggests that someone’s wishes in a living will are no different from the wishes of their family: they are both the wishes of people who are fundamentally different from the patient sitting in the bed. The writer of the living will just happens to have the same name as the person who is now silent.

			That moral judgments depend more on mind perception than on objective mind is especially true with the silent. We had a thesis student named Annie Knickman who, after spending time in hospitals, noticed something funny about the mind perception of PVS patients: people spoke of them as if they completely lacked minds. In a biological sense PVS patients are somewhere in the limbo between living and dead, but people seemed to see them as more dead than dead. In her thesis studies, participants rated the agency and experience of normal people, PVS patients, and dead people. Unsurprisingly, people rated the living person as having more mind than either the PVS patient or the dead person, but PVS patients were also seen as having less mental functioning than dead people.39

			The reason for this strange reversal is something called dualism, which we explore in depth in chapter 8 on the dead. The short explanation is that when you are in a persistent vegetative state, people focus so much on the mechanics of your body, on your neurons and organs, on the breathing machines and feeding tubes, that they forget that there is also a mind in that body. We saw the same phenomenon in chapter 5 on the enemy: focusing on someone’s chest and butt turns them from a person into a mere sexual object. Consistent with “objectification,” the silent are often seen as biological machines more than living beings.



					 						Figure 31: Fetal Development

						When does the mind start?



				 			 			The ambiguity of mind poses difficulty not only for end-of-life decisions but also for beginning-of-life decisions. Consider fetuses—do they have minds? Out of all the cryptominds you would be hard-pressed to find one more controversial than a developing human in utero. In contrast to PVS and locked-in states, which are possible only with modern life-support machines, fetuses have been around for as long as humans. But despite eons of familiarity, there is still no consensus about when “life” or mind truly begins. Where is the line between mindlessly replicating cells and a nascent human being?

			One straightforward answer to this question is to draw the line at either the very beginning or the very end of development. The Catholic Church takes the “beginning” perspective, claiming that life begins at conception; as soon as an egg and a sperm fuse, there is life—the beginning of a new mind. This perspective is shared by many evangelical Christians, although this is a relatively recent trend. As late as the 1970s many evangelicals emphasized the other end of development and believed that life truly began at birth. Writing in Christianity Today in 1968, professors at Dallas Theological Seminary wrote that “God does not regard the fetus as a soul, no matter how far gestation has progressed,” and “The embryo is not fully human—it is an undeveloped person.”40

			This “life at birth” position arose to differentiate evangelicals from Catholics and meant that many were relatively comfortable with abortion. A symposium organized in 1968 by the Christian Medical Society affirmed that “the preservation of fetal life . . . may have to be abandoned to maintain full and secure family life,” as well as in cases of rape, incest, fetal deformity, and threat to the mother’s well-being, whether physical or emotional.41 Evangelical opinion, however, swung after church leaders such as Jerry Falwell reacted to the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision and advocated a “life at conception” interpretation of the Bible.

			Between the extremes of conception and birth, there are nine months of gradual change, which makes it difficult to draw any firm boundary. We can all agree on the presence of mind at nine months, and at eight months, but what about seven? Or six? Or five? Or four? Or three? When do cells become people? This question mirrors a long-standing philosophical problem called the sorites paradox, which asks when “grains of sand” become a “pile”?* We can all agree that one grain of sand is not a pile and that a thousand grains is a pile. We can also all agree that one grain of sand never makes the difference between a pile and not a pile. Two grains of sand still isn’t a pile and 999 grains of sand still is a pile. But here’s the paradox: If you keep adding (or taking away) single grains of sand, eventually you do end up with a pile (or a lack of pile). Somehow, “pileness” emerges from enough grains of sand, even though there is no one single grain that does the trick.

			With fetal development no single day is sufficient to transition from mere cells to a minded person, but a minded person eventually does emerge. This problem of vagueness plagues every human category, from newness (how many days until a new car is no longer “new”?) to money (how many dollars does one need in order to be “rich”?) to height (how many inches are required for someone to be “tall”?). The vagueness of fetal minds is particularly troublesome because laws about abortion require precision, such as allowing one during the first trimester but not in the fifty-third trimester when your son drives the family car through the garage door.

			One solution to the problem of vagueness is tying mind perception to biological changes, such as the “quickening,” when the fetus begins moving on its own. Most pregnant women detect fetal movement somewhere between eighteen and twenty weeks (or somewhat earlier if they’ve given birth before). The relative precision of the quickening in an otherwise vague developmental process has recommended it as a criterion for the right to life; the British legal scholar William Blackstone wrote in 1765, “Life . . . begins in contemplation of law as soon as an infant is able to stir in the mother’s womb.”42 The quickening was also used as the line beyond which women sentenced to death for crimes could “plead the belly” and stay the execution until after giving birth.43

			Another potential criterion is viability, the point at which a fetus is able to live on its own. In the dimensions of mind perception, viability can be thought of as agency, the capacity to act upon the world and to achieve one’s goals, if only minimally. However, the larger concern in fetal rights—as in most other moral rights—is the capacity for experience. When can a fetus feel pain and suffer? Neurologically speaking, at twenty-three to thirty weeks fetuses develop extensive connections to the thalamus, a brain structure that relays information from the body to higher cortical structures that process pain. EEGs reveal typical “awake” human brain waves a few weeks later in development, along with activations of the somatosensory cortex, which processes painful stimuli. Thirty weeks of development also marks the point at which infants will make facial grimaces in response to noxious stimuli, such as pokes in the heel or extreme heat.44

			Although this evidence converges to suggest something important happens at thirty weeks of development, it is unclear whether this represents conscious experiences of pain. Silent adult patients often have intact thalamocortical connections, exhibit alpha waves in EEGs, and will grimace in response to pokes and prods, but they do not necessarily feel pain. An engineer could easily build a mechanical sensor that reacts to pinches or extreme heat, but we wouldn’t say that it could “feel” pain any more than a sensor that detects colors can really “see” a sunset. Feeling requires a conscious mind.

			Fetal minds are especially ambiguous because perceptions of current mind are entangled with those of future mind. A fertilized zygote of thirty-two cells is extremely unlikely to have feelings and thoughts but, if left alone, will eventually develop into a person who does have these capacities. For potential parents it can be extremely hard to separate the actual from the potential. When people are bereft after a miscarriage, it is not because of the loss of mere cells but instead the loss of the imagined child, the disappearance of future Thanksgiving dinners and birthday parties. This is why some pro-choice advocates joke that pro-lifers want those contemplating abortion not only to get an ultrasound but also to paint their nursery and pick out a name.45

			Questions of mind at the beginning of life can sometimes continue even after birth, such as in the horrible case of anencephaly, where normal-looking babies are born missing all of their brain except for the brain stem—allowing them to stay biologically alive despite no other mental functioning.46 Bioethicists suggest that the most ethical choice in anencephaly is to harvest these babies’ organs to save the lives of other infants who need them (of children under the age of two who need organ transplants, 30 percent to 50 percent die before receiving them).47 Of course, it is incredibly difficult to not see a full human mind within your perfect-looking child, even when their lack of brain proves otherwise.

			The allure of a mind imagined and desired exerts its hold even after birth in another kind of silent mind—children with extreme autism. Having a child with any disability can be challenging, but the specific deficits of autism can be extremely trying for parents. Children with Down syndrome may have cognitive delays but easily connect emotionally with their parents, whether through hugs and kisses or by simply saying, “I love you.” Conversely, as we saw in chapter 5 on the enemy, autism is marked by difficulties in mind perception and communication that undermine emotional connection. Children with extreme autism may not be silent per se, but without the ability to cogently communicate or reciprocate feelings, they may leave their parents feeling unloved.

			This silence is why parents with autistic children were so excited by “facilitated communication” (FC), a technique that seemed to open up their children’s otherwise closed minds. In this technique the child sat in front of a computer keyboard while a helper “facilitated” his or her communication by holding his or her hands and sensing where the child wished to type. Ostensibly, these helpers detected minute muscle movements toward certain keys and used them to convey the thoughts and feeling of the autistic child.

			Parents were understandably delighted when their previously uncommunicative children would type out long missives of love and longing, such as “Autism held me hostage for seventeen years but not any more because now I can talk.”48 The practice, promoted in the United States by Douglas Biklen, a professor at Syracuse University, spread quickly. Teachers and parents alike were amazed at the messages that were coming from their children—but were they actually coming from their children at all? Suspicions were raised when some of the children began writing poetry and expressing ideas that were not just beyond expectations for an autistic child but beyond expectations for even the brightest children in their age range.

			To explain these remarkable children, practitioners of facilitated communication suggested the possibility of “language savants,” similar to others with autism who were mathematical or musical geniuses. Others had their doubts, wondering whether the entire practice was simply a way to make money from vulnerable parents. You might think that, either way, facilitated communication caused no harm and gave some parents hope, and so it was a matter of caveat emptor.

			Unfortunately, while most children wrote essays of love and wisdom, some children typed graphic accounts of rape and sexual assault at the hands of their parents—often their fathers, but at times extending to siblings, mothers, even grandparents. Courts of law had been accepting FC messages as genuine, but a father accused of brutally raping his autistic daughter demanded that facilitated communication be put to the test. He had lost his family and was facing the loss of his freedom: it was time to finally answer the question of who was really authoring these messages.

			A researcher, Dr. Howard Shane, was brought in to investigate the accusations. To determine the true mind behind the message, he designed a paradigm in which the child and the facilitator were asked to identify an item in an image and—unbeknownst to the facilitator—they were each shown a different image. For example, the child might be shown a bird while the facilitator was shown a dog. As the researchers watched, the child’s hands—guided by the facilitator—typed out “P-U-P-P-Y”—describing an image that the child had not seen.49 It appeared that these facilitated messages—whether heartfelt or accusatory—came from the minds of the facilitators and not from the children. These findings were replicated again and again, much to the disappointment of parents who had thought they had finally found a way to bridge the gap of autism.* When it comes to minds, perceptions are strongly biased by what people want to believe. But some things, like facilitated communication, are really too good to be true.

			More than any other cryptominds, the silent are characterized by wishful thinking. Whether they are fetuses, autistic children, or vegetative adults, we often perceive the kind of mind we wish (or fear) is present. We want to believe that grandparents without the capacity to talk or walk can nevertheless recognize their own grandchild. We want to believe that our spouse who suffered a stroke isn’t living in pain. We want to believe that the mind of a loved child loves us back. The silent provide a Rorschach inkblot of cryptomind, a mute canvas on which we project our own minds and desires.

			The silent lead us to wonder whether a body has lost its mind, but the cryptominds we explore next—the group—have the ability to steal our minds without even having a body.





Chapter 7


			THE GROUP





Every twelve years the medium-sized Indian city of Allahabad finds itself home to almost 100 million Hindu pilgrims over the course of eight weeks. Originally named Prayaga, “the place of offerings,” Allahabad is the meeting place (the Triveni Sangam) of three rivers: the Ganges, the Yamuna, and the Saraswati. The Ganges and the Yamuna are easy to find on a map, but the Saraswati is more difficult, because it has long since dried up. The Hindus believe that this mythical river still flows underground until it reaches Allahabad. They also believe that the gods dropped holy nectar into the Triveni Sangam, gifting this confluence of rivers the power to wash away sins. It is this cleansing power that attracts pilgrims to the Triveni Sangam. In the waters among the millions of others, pilgrims inevitably feel a powerful sense of transcendence. Walking, eating, and bathing as a group, they find their individuality drifting away, replaced by something much grander and more sustaining.

			In an article covering this phenomenon for National Geographic, writer Laura Spinney met an elderly couple who slept for weeks in an unheated tent at near-freezing temperatures while being constantly bombarded by noise loud enough to cause hearing loss. In addition to these living conditions, bathing in the river meant submersing yourself in frigid water so polluted that it is unsafe to either drink or bathe in. Despite the cold, pollution, and endless crowds, pilgrims nevertheless seem energized and rejuvenated by their experience of losing themselves to the group.



					 						Figure 32: Triveni Sangam



				 			 			Even in peaceful, spiritual Allahabad, however, the crowds can sometimes spell disaster. On February 10, 2013, at the local train station, pilgrims on their way home started jostling one another. When a few people fell, the police tried to intervene and panic ensued. A stampede crushed, trampled, and otherwise killed thirty-six people.1 In this kind of crowd the self becomes lost to the group, disappearing into the crackling, screaming energy of terror, and is regained only once the crowd disperses. Even those within the crowd who recognize the folly of their actions cannot help but push and trample. The group seems to have a mind of its own.

			We often speak of “group mind” as some mysterious force that influences people’s behavior, but do groups really have a mind? As we saw in the previous chapter, mind is intimately linked to brains, and groups certainly don’t have brains. Then again, brains themselves are merely groups of neurons, which themselves are dumb and mindless. So perhaps groups of people—who each have a mind—can make a collective mind. At the very least, groups like corporations, governments, and the Freemasons are perceived to have a mind. And as we’ll see, they are perceived to have a specific kind of mind, sitting firmly on one side of the moral typecasting fault line. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. Before we investigate the “group mind,” we must first discover what it means to be a “group.”

			The boundaries of an individual are reasonably obvious—you are whatever is inside your skin—but who or what belongs in a group is less straightforward. Consider your family. Who is in and who is out seems clear: mom, dad, sister, husband, and kids are in, whereas distant friends, work colleagues, and acquaintances are out. But what about your uncle who comes only for the holidays, or the biological cousin of your adopted sister, or the brother whom you haven’t spoken to for years because of his impossible wife? Do they count as “family”? Groups, like mind, are matters of perception, which further complicates things.

			One easy solution for identifying groups is to identify a collection of people in one place. Many groups fulfill this criterion, such as the pilgrims at Allahabad, military platoons, and even nations of people. But this criterion cannot be enough; otherwise the five people waiting at the bus stop are as legitimate a group as the five people who make up the latest pop sensation “All 5-4-Love.”* Another potential rule of thumb could be whether a collection of people has the word “group” or “club” or “organization” in its name, like the Sierra Club, the National Organization for Women, or the Pop-Tarts Addiction Group. But these labels exclude folks whose associations are too ephemeral for labels, such as protesters or construction crews of day laborers.

			Not only does any definition of “group” yield exceptions, but the more you peer at groups, the more they seem to vanish. We focus on individuals in everyday life, and the more you focus on specific individuals within a group, the more the connections among them disappear. Just as you can “miss the forest for the trees,” so too do we often miss “the group” because we think of it from the perspective of any one person. The more you stare at the lead singer of the band or the CEO of a corporation, the more superfluous everyone else seems. Sometimes you just have to take a step back and look at the gestalt.

			Gestalt is a German word that translates to “shape” or “form,” but it has long held another deeper definition in psychology. Gestalt psychology began in the early twentieth century as a reaction to psychology that examined isolated elements of human perception. Whereas a typical psychologist studied the perception of specific features like shadows or edges or lines, a Gestalt psychologist studied how it all fit together. Although Gestalt psychologists primarily studied visual perception, they revealed five principles of “groupiness” that also apply to perceptions of people: proximity, similarity, closure, continuation, and common fate.2

			Proximity is the idea that people in groups are typically close to one another. It is easier to be a group when all members are seated in the same basement than when half the people are in Croatia and the other half are in Japan. Bands, sports teams, and reading clubs are characterized by physical proximity and so seem more authentic than Internet groups in which members live all across the globe.* Like proximity, similarity is a relatively straightforward concept. Groups are “groupier” when their members share many similarities, such as the same race, religion, or music preferences. This is why there are more “Black Student Associations” on college campuses than “Black, White, Asian, and American Indian Associations.”



			 				Figure 33: How Do You Group These Dots?

				Following the Gestalt principle of similarity, we organize the dots into rows of similar color—not into columns of alternating color.



			 			Interestingly, we tend to see similarities based on present traits rather than absent traits. We consider Seventh-day Adventists more grouplike than atheists because atheists are unified by the absence of faith rather than the presence of faith. If you looked around your living room, you’d likely see chairs, a table, a lamp, and maybe a rug on the floor and a picture on the wall. But now consider the objects that aren’t present. Well, probably a car, a monkey, and the Sydney Opera House. In fact, there are an infinite variety of things that could be absent. Absences do a poor job of unifying people because they are much less specific. Imagine a group that thinks Picasso is the greatest painter ever and another group that thinks he isn’t—only the former seems like a real group.

			The principle of closure suggests that the most obvious shapes—and groups—have firm boundaries. A group seems ill defined if anyone can join and leave, especially if it allows partial membership. Consider the difference between being a Unitarian Universalist and being Jewish. It is easy to become a Unitarian Universalist and easy to leave the church, and there’s no clear division between people who are and aren’t Unitarian Universalists. In contrast, questions of Jewish identity are much sharper. You are legitimately Jewish only if your mother was Jewish or you undergo an extremely arduous conversion procedure (and even then, it’s not really the same). It’s also hard to renounce being Jewish—even if you don’t believe in God, don’t celebrate Passover, don’t speak Yiddish, and don’t have a mother who makes you feel especially guilty, you’re still Jewish, often by virtue of a continuous Ashkenazi bloodline.

			Speaking of continuous, continuity is another Gestalt principle. In shapes continuity means that a shape doesn’t stop as soon as there is some visual barrier. For example, in a drawing of two overlapping keys, we expect the bottom key to continue on after it passes under the top key. Continuity is equally important with groups. Temporary flash mobs may technically be groups, but the groupiest groups are those that stick around despite the challenges that they face. To return to the Jewish people, what makes them groupier than many other religions is their continuation through millennia of persecution.



					 						Figure 34: Continuity in Shapes

						The bottom key continues even after it is obscured by the crossing over of the top key.



				 			 			The most important criterion for perceptions of groups is probably common fate. Groups are collections of people that not only are similar, proximate, closed, and continuous but also share a destiny. When a corporation goes bankrupt, everyone is out of a job; when a football team wins the Super Bowl, everyone gets a ring. Groups often fall apart when this common fate comes undone, such as when work teams get rewarded for individual performance rather than group performance.3

			Combining the principles of proximity, similarity, closure, continuity, and common fate yields a measure of groupiness that is typically given the more scientific name of “entitivity”—how much something is an entity. Perceptions of entitivity—like those of mind—not only are ambiguous but also dictate how we perceive mind in groups and group members. For an obvious example, consider sheep.

			Sheep don’t appear to possess the most powerful of minds. They’ve never built a civilization, can’t drive, and do even worse at Jeopardy. But they are far more intelligent than you might think. In a series of studies, Cambridge University researchers tested the cognitive ability of seven Welsh Mountain sheep in a specially constructed maze.4 Despite their reputation as fuzzy dunces, sheep are just as smart in these situations as rodents and monkeys.

			If sheep are so smart, then why do they seem so stupid? The answer is that sheep are highly entitive—they live in those very “groupy” groups that we call “flocks.” Any one sheep appears highly similar to other sheep (at least to our eyes), they remain spatially nearby other sheep, and they have a collective fate. It is the entire flock that is led by a shepherd or stalked by wolves or herded by a border collie, so it’s unnecessary to consider the thoughts of any single sheep to understand the behavior of the flock. It is groupiness that strips away mind from individual sheep; when we admonish people for mindlessly following the crowd, we say, “Don’t be a sheep.”

			Research suggests anyone seems dumber in a group, including teenagers, college students, and even the elderly. Consider the difference between talking to your grandmother in her room at the nursing home and watching the sea of gray hairs march down to the dining room for five o’clock dinner. The collective shuffling of the latter seems much less thoughtful. Two psychologists, Adam Waytz and Liane Young, investigated this effect, hypothesizing that it hinged upon the entitivity of the group: the more entitive the group, the less mind individual members should be perceived to possess. To test this hypothesis, participants rated the minds of individuals belonging to low-entitivity groups like Facebook users or golf players and high-entitivity groups like the U.S. Marine Corps or the New York Yankees, which exhibit the principles of similarity, proximity, closure, continuity, and common fate. As predicted, in more entitive groups members were stripped of their individual minds.5

			Psychologist Carey Morewedge and his team independently found this effect with a creative experimental design. One of Morewedge’s coinvestigators, psychologist Jonathan Schooler, had a daughter who owned an aquarium full of brine shrimp, or Sea-Monkeys. At first the aquarium was populated by a large cluster of shrimp, and each individual shrimp wasn’t particularly interesting to Schooler or his daughter. But gradually, as happens with pets, the shrimp began to die, until there was just one left.

			Suddenly this one remaining brine shrimp was fascinating—Schooler and his daughter gave it a name and began to see it as possessing personality traits. Of course, this same shrimp had been there all along, but it became interesting only once it had shed its surrounding group. Mimicking this Sea-Monkey experience, the researchers showed participants pictures of individuals in groups of varying sizes and also manipulated the individuals’ proximity and similarity to the group. They found that the more an individual stood out—by being in a smaller group, being distant from the group, or being different from the group—the more they were perceived to possess mind.6

			Importantly, the perceived mind stripped from group members in entitive groups doesn’t just vanish. Instead it gets ascribed to the group as a whole. Take the case of a squad of marines. Not only do marines all look the same, courtesy of uniforms and haircuts, but they all have the same training and—within a given squad—have the same mission and intertwined fates. Because they act together as one unit, it makes sense to think of the whole squad as a mind, rather than individual marines. The secretary of defense doesn’t need to know that Private Jones misses home or that Private Wilson listens to heavy metal music to get pumped up. All she needs to know is that the entire squad is planning on taking the enemy position, collectively believing that they have the tactical advantage.

			This mind-perception “trade-off”7 between groups and their members is reminiscent of the mind-perception fault line seen throughout the book. Just as individual minds are seen as either feelers or doers, minds are ascribed to either groups or their members. Groups may derive their perceived mind from their members, but studies reveal that groups are ascribed a different kind of mind from their members.

			In one experiment philosophers Josh Knobe and Jesse Prinz asked people to rate the “naturalness” of a number of sentences. Some of these sentences asked whether a company, Acme Corp, believed its profit margins would increase or intended to release a new product. In other words, they asked about Acme Corp’s status as a thinking doer. Other sentences asked about Acme Corp’s ability to have experience and be a vulnerable feeler, such as whether Acme Corp was feeling joy or pain. The agency-related set of statements were all rated as very natural, whereas the experience set of statements were rated as rather unnatural.*8

			These results suggest that—unlike the humans who make up groups—groups themselves are typically seen only as thinking doers and not as vulnerable feelers. A cohesive collection of people has agency but not experience. In another test of this “group as agent” hypothesis, we included Google in our set of mind-survey characters. As predicted, people admitted that Google could think and act but denied it the ability to feel and sense—placing it in the bottom right of the mind survey, together with God.

			Corporations seem to lack experience because they lack a body, which is the seat of our passions and the vehicle through which we feel hunger, and lust, and fear. Although you might be willing to grant that Google is feeling a bit disappointed with a Supreme Court decision, you are likely unwilling to say that Google is thirsty or lustful. Experience rests in the body, and only individuals have bodies, which obscures even the experience of individuals within groups.

			Because experience is grounded in the individual, people will often spend thousands of dollars to help a single person but nothing to help many people—a fact well noted by Joseph Stalin, who is rumored to have said, “A single death is a tragedy, a million deaths is a statistic.”* Take the case of Baby Jessica, an eighteen-month-old who in 1987 fell down a well. Picture a steel pipe eight inches wide, which is just wide enough for a little baby girl to become wedged inside, dozens of feet below the surface. When Jessica’s story was featured on the national news, people around the world gave a total of $800,000 for her successful rescue, a heartwarming display of generosity.9

			But before your heart gets too warm, in the span of time that she was trapped (two and a half days), just under 35,000 children likely died worldwide from malnutrition.10 How many of these lives could have been saved for the same amount of money? A lot. Those commercials that promise to help out a starving village for just dollars a day aren’t lying. It’s relatively cheap to give children in developing nations access to clean water, sufficient food, and basic medical supplies—at least orders of magnitude cheaper than rescuing Baby Jessica.

			As we explored in chapter 4 on the patient, we help others when we feel empathy, and it is easier to empathize with the story of a single American girl than with thousands of faceless African children. However, people help individuals even when they know nothing about them. In one elegant study conducted at Carnegie Mellon University,11 researchers evenly divided ten dollars among a group of eight participants by dealing out forty twenty-five-cent tickets (i.e., participants got five tickets each). Participants were then divided into “keepers” and “losers.” The losers were told that they had to forfeit all their money, while the keepers held on to their tickets. The keepers were then given an additional option—they could donate some of their tickets to a loser.

			Some keepers were assigned a specific participant who would receive their donation (e.g., “participant 4”), whereas others were just told that it would go to “one” of the losers. Importantly, the participants never met and keepers had no clue about the real identity of participant 4. From the keepers’ perspectives, their money was still going to some random person out of the eight—but now that person had a name, even if that name was just a participant number. Keepers who had an “identifiable” victim donated an average of $3.42, whereas keepers who had a (more) unknown victim donated only an average of $2.12. If donations increase with simple identification, imagine what happens when we know someone’s real name, gender, and specific predicament—as in the case of Baby Jessica.

			It pays to be an individual not only when are you are harmed but also when you perpetrate harm. In chapter 1 we saw that minds are typically divided into doers and feelers, an idea expanded upon in chapter 4 on the patient with the concept of moral typecasting. Moral typecasting suggests that we see others as either blameworthy moral agents or innocent moral patients—explaining why it pays to play the victim card in court. This legal strategy works for individual humans, because we all have both agency and experience and can emphasize our experience to garner sympathy. Groups, on the other hand, are seen as possessing only agency and lacking the experience needed to earn sympathy.

			We are happy to prosecute companies that dump pollution, lay off employees, or rig the stock market but rarely feel bad when they get dismantled or are the targets of hostile takeovers.12 This has led psychologist Tage Rai to suggest that “corporations are cyborgs.” As revealed in chapter 3 on machines, it is easy to blame robots as moral agents but hard to see them as vulnerable moral patients. The same is true of groups.

			Consider when an army squadron commits a terrible crime in the theater of war. Such a crime may be inexcusable, but we could still extend compassion to the young men and women who face danger, watch their friends die, and wake up in sweats from night terrors. But these problems are suffered by individual soldiers, and so when a group does something heinous, people feel less overall sympathy and demand punishment. Unfortunately, it is the individual members who bear the punishment for wrongdoing, not the group.

			The denial of experience to groups means we fail to extend them the same protections as other cryptominds like babies and puppies. Mitt Romney has challenged this habit, arguing that “corporations are people too”13 and deserve the right to support candidates in elections. The Supreme Court agreed. In a five-to-four decision it ruled that corporations have the same free-speech rights as individuals.14 What about other rights? In one lampoon, Stephen Colbert takes seriously the idea that corporations are people, suggesting that Romney’s work at Bain Capital, in which he downsized and divided (i.e., dismembered) corporations qualifies him as a serial killer.15

			We laugh at this idea because even forcibly dividing a corporation seems to cause no real suffering, but the inability of groups to suffer causes consternation to those who wish to see them punished. If a corporation harms the environment, its customers, or its employees, how can we make this group agent suffer in turn? One solution is to levy fines, but does this really “hurt” the corporation? The lack of experience in groups is why mere financial settlements against corporations are so unfulfilling. Consider the $1.9 billion settlement levied against HSBC for allowing the laundering of billions for Mexican drug cartels.16 Even two billion dollars is unsatisfying when the crime involves supporting organizations that display severed heads along the sides of highways.

			The invulnerability of groups coupled with their ability to plan and act can also lead us to distrust them—especially invisible ones built on world domination. To understand what we mean, just look up at the sky. See the soft white lines of jet exhaust crisscrossing above you? You may not have given these condensation trails—or “contrails”—much thought, but consider the pattern they make from space. Each day thousands of planes fly across the world, and their contrails form a tight grid around the globe, an inescapable web of white fog. From your vantage point on the ground, each of these contrails seems to leave only water, but from that distance could you distinguish water from acid or from hallucinogens or other mind-control agents?

			Because you’ve read this far, we feel that we can trust you with an important secret: There is a secret group controlling the highest reaches of government, including the Federal Aviation Administration. Every day this nefarious group impregnates jet fuel with a variety of chemicals that mist out from the engines and float down into your lungs. The white lines above you aren’t just contrails—they’re chem trails—made from chemicals expressly designed to subjugate people, turning normally free-thinking Americans into docile drones who accept without question this group’s propaganda. What propaganda? Not only the liberal media but also the subliminal messages embedded in your favorite television programs. With only a 767 passing silently overhead and the right commercial, shadow governments can rob you of your free will.

			As you may have guessed, this is an example of a conspiracy theory, broadly called the “chem-trail” theory. Although there is virtually no evidence to support it, that hasn’t stopped many people from believing it and attempting to use their innate psychic powers to disperse the sky chemicals. Conspiracy theories are as old as human society. For as long as there have been social ills, people have blamed them on nefarious, high-agency, low-experience groups such as the Illuminati, the Freemasons, or the shape-shifting lizard people known as Reptilians.* Today conspiracies are implicated in everything from the devastation of the 9/11 attacks17 to the suffering caused by the rise of autism.18



					 						Figure 35: Reptilian

						An artist’s interpretation of a Reptilian leader of the New World Order, a legitimate conspiracy theory.



				 				 			 			Why do conspiracy theories emerge so robustly to explain tragedies such as disease, war, and death? The answer—as you may have guessed from previous chapters—is dyadic completion. When there is a tragedy, people seldom throw up their hands, say, “C’est la vie,” and accept the inherent randomness of life. Instead they search for meaning, asking not only how something bad could have happened but also who is behind it. When people feel like suffering moral patients, their dyadic moral template compels them to find moral agents to hold responsible. We first saw this kind of “agentic dyadic completion” in chapter 2 on animals, where people put a pig on trial for the death of a child.

			As an easy example, consider rush-hour driving. When a car cuts you off during your daily commute, you likely seldom think, “They must be in a hurry,” or even, “They’re a little distracted,” but instead, “That asshole knew I was there and cut me off just to spite me!!” The link between perceptions of harm and perceptions of evil intention is nicely illustrated by a pair of scenarios designed by philosopher Joshua Knobe.

			Both scenarios feature a chairman of the board presented with a new, profitable project by a company vice president. In the first case, the VP says, “We are thinking of starting a new program. It will help us increase profits, but it will also help the environment.” The chairman of the board then answers, “I don’t care at all about helping the environment. I just want to make as much profit as I can. Let’s start the new program.” The question is whether the chairman intentionally helped the environment. Most people in this case answer no—if the CEO doesn’t care about helping the environment, then the help is unintentional. But now consider the second scenario with only one word changed.

			The VP now says to the chairman of the board, “We are thinking of starting a new program. It will help us increase profits, but it will also harm the environment.” The chairman of the board then answers, “I don’t care at all about harming the environment. I just want to make as much profit as I can. Let’s start the new program.” Did the chairman intentionally harm the environment? Most people now answer yes—if the CEO doesn’t care about harming the environment, then the harm is intentional.19 This is a striking reversal. His words and deeds were exactly the same in both cases, and in both cases he was motivated only by profit. However, psychologically we perceive the good act to be merely incidental and the evil act to be intentional.

			Harm compels us to find a mind to blame, but not all minds are equally blameworthy. You’ll notice that the environmental harm was pinned on a business leader and not a puppy, as dyadic completion can only occur with someone or something that possesses a lot of agency. You’re not going to blame a little girl for the downturn of stocks or a cancer patient for a plane crash but instead presidents and cabinet ministers and corporations. Agentic dyadic completion often locates specific agents to blame. When the environment is harmed because of corporate policies, we blame the CEO; when a loved one dies from botched surgery, we blame the overconfident doctor; and when someone beats us for a promotion, we blame our biased boss.

			However, some events are difficult to pin on any one person, whether because the chain of blame is uncertain or because the magnitude of suffering is too great to imagine its being caused by a single individual. In these cases, such as the day the music died* or JFK’s assassination, we seek to blame something even more powerful and mysterious: the agentic minds of conspiring groups. Mass destruction calls for mass intentional evil, which conspiracies—with their collection of calculating senators, bankers, and spies—can easily provide. Perhaps the best example of this is from the show The X-Files, in which a group of men smoke in a shadowy room, pulling the strings on alien abductions, secret experiments, and mind control.



					 						Figure 36: Belief in Various Conspiracy Theories

						BASED ON T. JENSEN, “DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS DIFFER ON CONSPIRACY THEORY BELIEFS” (PUBLIC POLICY POLLING, 2013).



				 			 			Conspiracy theories are helped by the complicated nature of causation. The most immediate causes of events are often obvious, but their ultimate causes are unclear. Consider the case of the common cold. The immediate reason for your sickness is a quickly replicating virus, but why did you get the virus at that exact time, and why is it making you sick and not your coworkers? Lack of sleep? Lack of vitamin C? Licking too many doorknobs? In the case of JFK’s assassination, the proximate cause was a bullet. But less clear is the ultimate cause of these events: How did Oswald get to the depository unnoticed? How did he purchase the guns? Was the CIA involved? With any tragedy there are levels upon levels of causation, and we usually keep going up them until arriving at a sufficiently agentic mind, such as a conspiring group. Typically, the bigger the tragedy is, the larger the conspiracy we perceive. As we’ve seen, groups harvest their mind from their members, and so the more members are involved in a conspiracy, the more it seems to have agency.

			So far we have learned two things about how people perceive the minds of groups. The first is that we take mind away from individual group members and instead give it to the overall group. The second is that we frequently blame groups—and their agentic minds—for wrongdoing. Sometimes this evildoing is perpetrated by collections of überpowerful individuals, but recent movies, television, and books have popularized a very different idea of group evil. Accounts such as World War Z, The Walking Dead, and 28 Days Later have depicted groups who do incredible harm but with relatively mindless members. It paints these group members as zombies—not the philosophical kind this time but actual brain-eating monsters.

			Zombies illustrate our deep fears about what happens to people in groups. They lose all individual thought and self-control, shuffling mindlessly toward their goal of destruction. Even more than sheep, zombies are completely interchangeable, each of them slack-jawed and glassy-eyed in tattered clothes. If this sounds like teenagers, you’re right, and the comparison is very apt, as people seem to fear zombies similarly to how they fear groups of youths standing on the corner. Members of both groups seem to lose themselves to the will of the group and to think little for themselves. Although zombification due to experimental viruses is good science fiction, the zombification of people in groups is just good science.

			Consider the murder of Michael Roberts, a fifty-three-year-old homeless man, by a group of teenagers. Their motive? Boredom. The boys were looking for amusement, and Roberts was simply in the wrong place at the wrong time. The teens punched and kicked him and hit him with sticks. One boy even dropped a log onto Roberts’s ribs, which the boys then jumped on. They left Roberts’s body in a woods and the next day invited friends to come see the corpse of the man they had just killed.20 Who were they? Terrifyingly, they were just normal teenage boys together in a group. Just as groups can strip perceived mind from members, they can also strip actual mind from members.

			Losing one’s individual mind to the group collective is called deindividuation, and though it may most easily affect young men, it can influence anyone, regardless of age, race, or gender. Whenever people assemble for a common purpose, whether a sporting event, a religious service, or a political protest, our minds seem to leave us and get taken up by the group. This heady experience, called “we-feeling,” is a kind of altered state of consciousness that is not necessarily bad in itself. In fact, it can be a wonderful thing, as we saw with the Allahabad pilgrims, who transcended their individual lives when spiritually connected to millions of like-minded others.

			This we-feeling is induced especially through synchrony, when your actions are closely matched to those of other group members. Examples of synchrony include platoons marching in step, concert fans swaying back and forth together, and prayers being jointly said by a congregation—each of which seems to bind people together into a coherent whole. To test the bonding power of synchrony, Stanford psychologists Scott Wiltermuth and Chip Heath had participants walk around campus in groups of three. Half of these groups walked synchronously, marching in step, whereas the other groups walked normally. Each group then participated in an economic game that required a high amount of group trust in order to succeed. Wiltermuth and Heath found that participants who had walked in synchrony were more trusting of one another and outperformed those groups who hadn’t walked in synchrony.21

			Synchrony facilitates not only group goodness but also group evil. In another study by Wiltermuth, participants who walked in step with a leader felt closer to him or her and were therefore more willing to kill at the leader’s behest.22 Of course, as this was a psychology study, participants were tempted to kill only insects, but it is easy to apply the findings to human victims. The link between synchrony and destructive conformity explains why military groups march in step. Nazi goose-stepping may look odd, but it encouraged the soldiers to follow the cruel orders of their leaders.

			Synchrony with group members is one way that groups encourage evil against outsiders, and anonymity is another. History has repeatedly shown that groups are especially destructive when members cannot be identified, whether because of masks or uniforms or even the firewalls of the Internet. This anonymity leads group members to identify more with the group and see outsiders as more bound to their rival groups.23 Cloaked in his uniform, a Nazi soldier sees himself not as an individual but instead as simply a Nazi, while also viewing his victims not as individual human beings but as members of an undesirable group to be exterminated.



					 						Figure 37: Anonymous Protesters

						Anonymity increases cruel behavior.



				 			 			Even without a group context, anonymity frees people to be evil individuals. People who feel anonymous are more aggressive drivers,24 are less willing to share with others,25 are more likely to participate in racist aggression,26 and are more likely to commit extreme acts of violence.27 The liberating thrill of anonymity unleashes those primal passions that Freud consigned to the id, allowing them to riot, loot, and lynch. Take a less extreme example from YouTube user Kaipotainment, who innocently posted a (reasonably entertaining) video of his cat, edited to look like it has X-Man Wolverine’s claws.28 Moments after the video’s posting, the first anonymous Internet trolls descended with their vitriol. YouTube user SolidestStone wrote,


This is RAD! . . . . NOT!

			Awe . . . Pointless and Boring!

			Dumb

			FAKE!

			Ghey

			Justin Bieber

			That last dig certainly crosses the line, but none of these comments is likely to be said face to face between the people behind Kaipotainment and SolidestStone. We may laugh at the frivolity of this example, but other cases of Internet anonymity are much darker, such as when gay teens are bullied into taking their own lives. Rafael Morelos, a fourteen-year-old from Washington, committed suicide after cyberbullying that included the creation of a fake Facebook page mocking his sexual orientation.29

			There are two ways to combat these cruel trolls. The first is to unmask them, as one online newspaper found that requiring commenters to list their full names reduced the incidence of racism, profanity, and hate speech.30 The second way to combat trolls is to fight fire with fire and out-troll the trolls. This is one of the hobbies of the hacker group Anonymous, which uses its impressive computer skills to advance its own brand of social justice. In one case Amanda Todd, a fifteen-year-old Canadian girl, was bullied by a man she had met online. In an early conversation the man persuaded Todd to flash her webcam. He then demanded more nude photos of her under the threat that he would post the original picture all over the Internet. Even more frightening, he had somehow discovered the names of her family members and where she lived and used these details to increase the severity of his blackmail. Because of this cyberbullying, Todd became so depressed that she hanged herself.

			The story gained wide attention, thanks in large part to a YouTube video Todd had posted, describing her ordeal and the suffering that followed. It caught the attention of Anonymous, and soon the hunt was on to unveil the identity of her tormentor. Soon enough the name of her alleged abuser was posted online, along with screenshots of his Internet history—and where he lived.31 Just as anonymity had allowed the man to bully Todd, it allowed Anonymous to pursue effective vigilante justice. Todd’s tormenter was arrested and charged with extortion, Internet luring, criminal harassment, and child pornography. As a group itself, Anonymous seems especially formidable, consisting of pure agency and impossible to harm—a conspiracy of do-gooders—serving, one hopes, to remind would-be offenders to think twice.

			Of course, even social movements that start with the best of intentions can go awry, such as Reddit’s hunt for the Boston Marathon bombers. After the detonation of two improvised explosive devices at the 2013 Boston Marathon, law-enforcement agencies were desperate for information. A group of users of the popular social media site Reddit hoped that crowdsourcing could effectively identify possible suspects and began poring over images of the marathon for suspicious figures. Soon they thought they had found their man—Sunil Tripathi, a student at Brown University. Unfortunately for Tripathi, he bore a close resemblance to the Tsarnaev brothers (the real bombers) and became social media’s prime suspect. Despite being innocent, Tripathi could not bear the hateful media attention and the Brown University crew team later found his floating body, dead in an apparent suicide.32

			Although anonymity can unleash real evil, large Internet groups also undermine more prosaic prosocial behavior, such as donating to charity. In 2007 Facebook launched “Causes,” through which charities could raise both online awareness and money. Facebook hoped it would revolutionize online activism through two basic psychological mechanisms. The first was influence, that people follow their friends not only in fashion and music but also in charitable activities. Once enough people in a friend group joined a Cause, Facebook hoped it would reach a “tipping point”33 and start a cascade of helping.

			Causes also banked on consistency, hoping that once people had joined a cause, they would also donate to it. In a classic social psychological example of consistency, some homeowners were asked to put a small sticker on their door saying DRIVE CAREFULLY, and most acquiesced. Afterward these same folks were willing to place a large and gaudy DRIVE CAREFULLY sign on their front lawn, in order to be consistent with their past behavior. In contrast, those who weren’t first given a sticker—and so lacked the motivation for consistency—said no to the ugly sign.34

			In Facebook Causes people could do two things: they could “join” a Cause, which is the low-cost equivalent of the small sign, or they could “donate” to it, which is the equivalent of the big, gaudy sign. Did the low-cost joining lead to higher-cost donations, further propelled by social influence? To test this idea, Kevin Lewis, Jens Meierhenrich, and one of us (Kurt) looked at the complete records from the Save Darfur Cause as of January 2010.

			Save Darfur raises awareness and funds to combat genocide and raised $70 million in offline donations (e.g., through direct-mailing campaigns) in the years measured.35 For its part, the online Cause raised approximately $100,000 dollars, which sounds respectable until you realize that there were more than one million members, yielding an average of only $0.10 per person. Even more striking, the vast majority of all action was taken by a small number of members—only 28 percent recruited anybody, and only 0.24 percent actually donated.36 In comparison, direct-mail campaigns usually have response rates between 1.3 percent and 3.4 percent.37

			This dismal turnout is explained by the old saying “Why buy the cow when you can get the milk for free?” In this case the milk is the social status of being a good person, and buying the cow is actually donating. The Causes app was structured so that you could see when your friends joined a cause but not when they actually donated. This means that you got social rewards from the low-cost option but none from the high-cost options, letting people appear good without actually having to work for it. This has been cleverly called slacktivism, a term that was originally coined in the mid-1990s and has gained popularity with the rise of online petitions.38

			Donations aside, we generally expect that if you want to get a job done, it’s best to have all hands on deck. As the saying goes, “Many hands make light the work.” However, this turns out not to always be the case, because groups can lead individuals to contribute less than they might when alone. Just as people have less mind in groups, they also contribute less effort. In the early twentieth century, a French researcher named Maximilien Ringelmann measured the effort of individuals when they pulled on a rope either alone or as part of a team. He found that individuals put in much less effort when pulling as part of a team than when they pulled alone, an effect now sometimes called the Ringelmann effect39 but more often called “being lazy.” Replicating this effect, researchers from Ohio State University found that people who are asked to either shout or clap will do so much more energetically alone* than in a group.40

			Even when people are very motivated to perform well, groups can lead to suboptimal decisions through “group think.” Group think is when people fail to voice their concerns in a group meeting, and it led to the deaths of the seven astronauts on the space shuttle Challenger. On January 27, 1986, one day before the launch, the engineers met to discuss the next day’s cold-weather forecast. Individually they each doubted that the rubber O-ring in the solid rocket boosters would function in the below-freezing temperatures, but collectively it seemed that the group wasn’t worried. Each engineer erroneously believed that everybody else was confident about the O-ring and mistook the group’s silence for confidence. The O-ring went in as planned and the shuttle exploded seventy-three seconds after takeoff.41

			As groups strip away minds from individuals, often the best way to understand group behavior is to entirely ignore individual minds. Consider large, moving crowds, such as the thousands of people who leave a stadium at the end of a game. Everyone in the crowd may have their own thoughts and desires, but safety engineers often treat a large group as a simple fluid, albeit one with psychological regularities. This approach has effectively reduced the death and destruction caused by stampedes as people crush toward an exit.42 One insight is to not provide an easy line of sight or single path to doors, lest the density of the crowd get too high. Instead, doors are placed behind large pillars, so that people must flow around them from both sides and reconvene where the pressure is lower.

			The examples so far suggest that individuals within groups, if not totally mindless, are at least best understood as so. But this sells groups short. Although individuals may lack minds in groups, minds wouldn’t exist without groups. Why? Because minds are groups. Your brain—the basis of your mind—has approximately one hundred billion neurons. Each of these cells is little more than a biological on/off switch made of membranes and metal ions, triggered by chemicals from other neurons, and in turn triggering other neurons with its own chemicals.

			Exactly how the mind emerges from a symphony of mindless cells is one of the most difficult questions facing modern science, but most scientists agree that the answer lies in emergence. Emergence is when simple elements at lower levels combine to be more than the sum of their parts at higher levels. Consider your computer, through which you can listen to music, write documents, or play the latest video games. It is hard to believe that all this rich diversity is accomplished with the same basic ingredients—electrons rushing through semiconductors—but it is the number and interconnection of these semiconductors that give computers their power. Low-level electron behavior is translated into machine language, then operating systems, then object-oriented languages like C++ or Java, and then finally the rich experience of cursing at the angry bird who failed its mission.43

			Consider also the case of ants. Each ant is individually not much more than a little six-legged machine with little (if any) mind. But if you look at the behavior of the colony collectively, it displays surprisingly sophisticated behavior: it reacts to threats,44 seeks out new food,45 safeguards its reproduction,46 and even plans for the future.47 It does this through a complex system of interactions, pheromones, and specialization. Most researchers agree that the individual ant is simply the wrong level at which to understand the colony, just as the individual organ or cell is the wrong way to understand the human body.48 We shouldn’t expect a single ant to be smart any more than we should expect an individual kidney cell or microchip to be smart. Smartness arises at the level of the group.

			Of course, if we put a billion cockroaches or toasters or livers into a huge box and shook it up, it is unlikely a mind would emerge. Instead, elements must be connected correctly, mutually reinforcing and constraining one another in just the right way. Exactly how to connect dumb things into intelligent wholes is one of the most important questions facing cognitive science today.

			If sufficiently interconnected elements allow for intelligence, one surprising possibility is that minds may exist at levels above humans. Consider the United States of America. Just like us (and ant colonies), it has millions of individual units (citizens) each of whom is highly specialized, with some acting in defense (soldiers), some acting to transport nutrients across the body (truckers), some acting as neurons to help the central brain decide action (congresspeople). When it is attacked (e.g., the terrorism of 9/11), it responds to eliminate those threats just like any self-interested creature with a mind. It forms close bonds with other countries (e.g., Canada), worries about foreign infection (e.g., illegal immigrants), consumes resources (e.g., food, iron, coal), and excretes waste products (e.g., garbage, CO2).

			Is the United States conscious? It’s hard to know. Would your kidney cell know that it is part of a higher-level, conscious organism? It may be that minds can see other minds only at their level or lower. We can see other people as minded and maybe even explain the behavior of our organs or cells as minded but may forever be unable to know if we ourselves are part of a higher-order mind. Perhaps countries are conscious, conversing with one another through us, just as we use our tongues to talk to other people. From the countries’ point of view, we may be their dumb cells that enact their higher-level plans for food production and waste disposal, espionage and protection. We may all be the unwitting pawns in the international dance of higher-level minds.

			Whether or not we are part of a bigger mind, groups of people can be quite wise, even without communicating. In 1907 Sir Francis Galton attended the annual show of the West of England Fat Stock and Poultry Exhibition. Part of the show involved the audience members guessing the weight of a recently slaughtered ox by writing down their answers on tickets. The lowest guess was less than 1,100 pounds, the highest guess was about 1,300 pounds, and the average estimate was 1,207 pounds, which was very close to the ox’s actual weight of 1,198 pounds. Thus, although any single individual guess was unlikely to be accurate, the collective wisdom of the crowd was within 1 percent of the ox’s actual weight.49

			More recently an initiative called the Good Judgment Project has evaluated the accuracy of crowd-based predictions of global events. Preliminary reports suggest that crowdsourcing better predicts world events than do the CIA’s trained specialists. For instance, forecasters collectively predicted with much greater certainty than experts the eventual presence of weapons inspectors in Syria.50 The secret to its success, according to project leader Phil Tetlock, is that the random noise contained in individual guesses tends to eventually cancel itself out. There may be a lot of misinformation and misconceptions about whether or not North Korea will launch a nuclear missile in the next few months, but our imperfect guesses tend to be centered on the truth. 51 As in the parable of the blind men and the elephant, each person may touch only a small piece of the puzzle, but when combined, these limited perceptions can yield the truth.

			The examples of this chapter speak to the broader paradox of mind perception: groups are the source of both the most mindless and the most intelligent behavior. This paradox can be resolved, however, if we understand that groups serve to pool the minds of their members. These members are left individually less intelligent, but together they can make something greater than even the sum of their individual minds. Beyond mere intelligence, there are other paradoxes about mind perception in groups. Groups allow us to cooperate and achieve amazing things, but they also cause us to perpetrate egregious harm, especially when we are anonymous. Groups are composed of individuals who feel and suffer, and yet groups as a whole are generally seen as incapable of feeling and suffering, which can make them easy targets for blame—and conspiracy theories.

			Of course, our very ability to feel and suffer comes itself from a group—the collection of our neurons. That our mind arises from interconnected brain cells is not only mysterious but also sobering. All cells one day die. When our neurons disintegrate, must too our mind? This is a question we investigate in the next chapter on the dead.





Chapter 8


	 			THE DEAD





John Edward bills himself as a psychic medium, performing his readings in front of a televised audience. In a typical example of a reading, he declares that energy is coming from a section of the crowd where a spiritual connection is suggesting “heart disease” and a name beginning with J.

			“Where’s James or John? Where’s heart disease?” A woman we’ll call Carol puts up her hand.

			“My father,” she replies.

			“Passed?”

			“Yes.”

			“Heart attack?” Edward asks.

			“Yes.”

			“I thought so,” he says, “and he’s sending me a message—are you the eldest girl in the family?”

			Carol reports that she is the only girl, but when Edward says, “Right, but he’s making me feel like you’re the strong one, the one he always trusted most.” She nods knowingly, trying to keep herself from crying.

			Driven on by the spirit, he continues, “He wants you to know that he loves you, and to tell you to keep being strong.” Carol wipes the tears from her face, deeply touched by her connection with her deceased father.

			This exchange is remarkable for two reasons. The first is Edward’s ability to convince thousands of people that he has a direct connection to the spiritual realm. Edward is likely not communicating with the dead but instead “cold reading,” a stage-magician technique of saying ambiguous statements (e.g., “James” or “heart disease”) and observing the audience for reactions. The best statement is one bound to be correct but with enough specificity to convince people that it applies only to them. In this particular case the odds of success are high: James and John are the two most popular American men’s names,1 and heart disease is the leading cause of death in America.2 In an audience of three hundred people, it is all but guaranteed that someone knows somebody named James or John who died of heart disease.

			Once these statements become linked to someone, Edward continues to make statements, tailoring them to subsequent information. For example, saying “You were the eldest” was a good guess, but when it turned out to be wrong, Edward simply said that Carol’s father treated her as if she were the eldest, which means only that he was impressed with her. Even if Edward fails on the details, he generally succeeds because of the predictable emotional bonds felt toward the deceased. He always conveys some heartfelt sentiment from beyond the grave, often that the deceased still loves the audience member and regrets not conveying that before they died. It may be just as likely that the deceased is angry that the audience member pawned an antique ring to buy a sports car, but such a detail never comes up. In the time-honored technique of showmen and hucksters, Edward tells people what they want to hear.

			We may marvel at Edward’s ability to convince others of his “spirit connection,” but it works only because people believe that the minds of others somehow persist after death. You may be saying to yourself, “Of course the minds of others persist after death.” But where do they persist exactly? In heaven? In hell? In your cellar, where they drag around their chains on Christmas Eve? Mostly they persist in your own mind. Even without physical reminders, it is exceptionally easy to perceive the minds of people who have long since passed away.3 You may forget what your dead grandparents looked or smelled like or how their laughs sounded, but you can still confidently say things like “Grandma would have liked it like this” or “Grandpa would be proud.” How do you know?

			Humans may be unique in the scope and depth with which they perceive the minds of others, but they are especially unique in how they perceive the minds of entities with no physical reality. Our father may be cremated into ashes and scattered over the rugged shores of Maine, and yet, even without physical remnants, we get a sense of his mind. If you died today, you can be sure your dog wouldn’t say, “David would be glad that I am eating this treat,” but it seems unremarkable when people say, “Rover would have loved this park.” Why—and how—humans perceive the minds of the deceased so vividly is the subject of this chapter.

			These topics may seem a little freaky, which is why our entrée to the dead will be the movie Freaky Friday, released in 2003, about a mother and a daughter who switch bodies. Hilarity ensues when the sedate, middle-aged mother finds herself playing in a teenage garage band and when the insolent, hormone-driven teen finds herself at PTA meetings. Switching bodies is a well-worn Hollywood plot twist, and every few years studios release a movie based on this premise. In Like Father Like Son (1987) and Vice Versa (1988), fathers switch bodies with their sons. In Virtual Sexuality (1999), The Hot Chick (2002), and It’s a Boy Girl Thing (2006), men switch bodies with women. Finally, in The Change-Up (2011), two friends named Dave and Mitch swap bodies through some complicated scientific process of electro-urine-mental-transduction: Both of them are peeing in an outdoor fountain when lightning strikes it. Suddenly married Dave finds himself trapped in the body of his single friend Mitch, and vice versa.

			Now that the married Dave is in a single man’s body, and single Mitch is in a married man’s body, we are left to grapple with two profound questions: One, is it cheating if (married) Dave has a one-night stand with an attractive woman while in (single) Mitch’s body? Two, does (single) Mitch betray (married) Dave by sleeping with his wife, even though he is in (married) Dave’s body? Informal polling suggests that, yes, having sex with these respective ladies is immoral. Why?

			The answer is that we identify people as their minds, seeing their bodies as mere containers. Our intuitions about body switching are the same as about car switching—even if Dave drove Mitch’s Pontiac Fiero and Mitch drove Dave’s minivan, they would still be the same people, despite being in different automobiles. Our bodies often seem little more than our minds’ vehicles, easily discarded or traded, which affords the sense that our minds persist after bodily death.

			This separation of mind from body not only is a popular plot device but also has deep roots in philosophy. For millennia philosophers have debated whether the world consists of one substance or two. The “one substance” supporters are called monists* and include ancient Greek philosophers Heraclitus and Parmenides and modern philosophers Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Baruch Spinoza. Supporters of the “two substances” are called dualists and include the philosophers René Descartes and, more recently, David Chalmers, the champion of philosophical zombies we met on the very first page.



					 						Figure 38: Rene Descartes, Dualist Philosopher



				 			 			The monists suggest that physical matter is everything, such that the atoms that make up your chair, your car, and your body are also responsible for your mind. For the monist it’s not mind over matter; instead mind is matter. In a monist world the death of the body spells the death of the mind, because the mind is simply one (albeit important) manifestation of the physical body.

			The dualist, on the other hand, believes that mind is completely distinct from matter. In this view mind is immaterial, with no obvious physical properties, and so cannot be scientifically measured with scales or even EEGs and fMRIs. In contrast to the single world of monism, dualism suggests that there are two distinct but intertwining worlds. One is the coarse, visible world of dumb matter, including atoms, molecules, objects, and bodies, and the other is the pure, invisible world of mind, including thought, reason, and beliefs.

			Unfortunately, the dualist version of reality poses some difficult questions, including how an immaterial mind interfaces with a physical body. It is all well and good to have thoughts floating alone in the rarefied ether, but our thoughts are connected with actions in the material world. We think, “Raise my hand,” and lo, our hand is raised. Monists have an explanation for this link, involving a chain of neurons from the cortex to the arm. Dualists do not. Descartes thought that the mysterious thought-action link involved the pineal gland, a small volume of tissue buried in the middle of the brain. He believed that this gland was the “principal seat of the soul,” but we now know that it simply regulates mammalian sleep cycles.

			Modern psychology generally refutes dualism, as the mind can be measured through electrical and magnetic activity and relies heavily on physical brain structures. As we saw in chapter 4 on patients, if you destroy someone’s brain, you inevitably also destroy their mind. However, modern psychology also tells us that intuitions often diverge from reality, and so dualism persists. For all of us who have thoughts and feelings, it is difficult to reconcile the mental and the physical, and even hardened scientists have to fight the urge to think in terms of dualism. In fact, psychologist Paul Bloom suggests that we are all natural-born-dualists.4

			As evidence for innate dualism Bloom cites studies involving babies and toddlers. These studies need to be clever because babies respond poorly to verbal questioning. Researchers cannot say, “Please stop breast-feeding for a second. We were wondering, were you born with the fundamental expectation that mind and matter are separate substances?” Instead they often use the behavioral measure of looking time, which is simply the length of time an infant stares at something. The reasoning behind this measure is that humans look longer at surprising things than at unsurprising things. For example, you will look longer at a young girl giving her father a piggyback ride than vice versa, because it violates expectations.

			To investigate innate intuitions about the nature of the world, experiments measure how long children stare at examples of either monism or dualism. If children ignore the examples of dualism but stare at examples of monism, that is evidence that they have the fundamental expectation that mind and matter are separate substances.

			The most striking of these studies was led by psychologist Valerie Kuhlmeier, who showed infants two videos, each containing an open stage with two sections of wall. In the continuous video, objects (e.g., a box) moved normally, progressing smoothly across the stage—starting on the left and heading right, first passing behind one wall, then appearing between the two walls, then passing behind the second wall, then appearing to the right of the second wall, then leaving the stage.

			In the discontinuous video, objects were strangely teleported across the stage—starting on the left, moving behind the first wall, then emerging to the right of the second wall, entirely skipping the space in the middle. Understandably, babies were surprised when an object was teleported, staring longer at the discontinuous than at the continuous video. However, when a person was featured in the video, babies looked equally long at the continuous and discontinuous videos. They weren’t surprised at all by a teleporting person,5 perhaps because they expect things with minds to (at least occasionally) disobey the laws of matter.



			 					 						Figure 39: Teleportation of an Object in the Discontinuous Condition

						When a human appears to teleport across the stage, infants are not surprised. When an object appears to teleport across the stage, this violates babies’ expectations.



				 				 			 			Of course, human bodies generally are subject to the laws of gravity and momentum, but these facts are often learned slowly and painfully, through falls and collisions. Even after a lifetime of experiencing the physical world, it is easy to believe in the unbounded power of the mind—how else could we entertain ideas like clairvoyance and remote viewing? It may be physically impossible to see maps locked in a cabinet overseas, but is it mentally possible? The American military thought so.

			At the height of the cold war, the CIA became convinced that the Russians were pouring money into psychic research. In actuality the Soviets were simply spreading misinformation (the equivalent of cold-war trolling) in a successful effort to get the United States to waste money. The Americans, fearing that they would be psychically outmaneuvered, started “Stargate Project,” a remote viewing program in which operatives, sitting safely on home soil, projected their minds overseas to steal secrets from the Communists. There were three techniques used by remote viewers: coordinate remote viewing (CRV), which reported sights at a specific location; extended remote viewing (ERV), which conveyed general visual impressions gleaned from relaxation and meditation; and written remote viewing (WRV), which channeled another individual’s thoughts into writing.6

			Initially this project appeared to yield results. In 1979 viewer Joseph McMoneagle “saw” suspicious construction at a Soviet nuclear research center and predicted the debut of a fearsome new class of submarines, two visions allegedly corroborated by spy satellite images. These and other insights earned McMoneagle a Legion of Merit in 1984 for “producing crucial and vital intelligence unavailable from any other source.” Unfortunately, these sightings—and the one “confirmation”—could not be corroborated by other sources, and despite $20 million of funding, no information provided by Stargate Project yielded “any value to the intelligence community.”7 The inability of these psychics to predict top-secret Soviet military decisions was perhaps unsurprising, considering remote viewers cannot even guess the identity of an object in a nearby box.8 Decades of scientific research have made clear that remote viewing is impossible—the mind can sense only through boring bodily routes—but intuitions of dualism make us want to believe in it and other forms of ESP.

			Intuitions of dualism are especially powerful in the case of death. Adults from Catholics to Scientologists believe that minds survive physical death; so do children.9 At the University of Arkansas, psychology professor Jesse Bering and his colleagues confirmed the early roots of afterlife belief with a study involving kindergartners. They performed a puppet play for the children, starring a baby brown mouse and a big green alligator, narrated as follows:


There’s Mr. Alligator hiding behind those bushes. And here comes Brown Mouse. Brown Mouse doesn’t see Mr. Alligator. And Mr. Alligator doesn’t see Brown Mouse yet. Brown Mouse is having a very bad day. First of all, he’s lost! He has no idea where he is or how to get home. . . . And he’s very hungry and thirsty because he hasn’t had anything to eat or drink all day. Uh-oh! Mr. Alligator sees Brown Mouse and is coming to get him! [Mr. Alligator eats Brown Mouse.] Well, it looks like Brown Mouse got eaten by Mr. Alligator. Brown Mouse is not alive anymore.10

			Children then answered questions about Brown Mouse’s mind, including those about bodily feelings (Was he still hungry?), desires (Did he still want to go home?), emotions (Did he still love his mom?), and knowledge (Did he still believe that he was smarter than his brother?). Kindergartners believed that dead Brown Mouse’s mind survived and possessed “mental” states like emotions and knowledge more than “physical” biological states like hunger and thirst. These results square nicely with dualism: when the body dies, so too do pesky biological urges, but thoughts and feelings remain.

			Dualism also persists in adulthood, showing itself in surprising paradoxes. As we briefly mentioned in chapter 6 on the silent, our thesis student Annie Knickman discovered that people often see more mind in deceased people than in vegetative patients, despite common sense and biology.11 The reason for this reversal is that vegetative states focus attention on the body at the expense of the mind. The more we see someone as a mechanical system of fleshy pumps, tubes, and wires, the less we see them as a mental system of thoughts, feelings, and desires. This effect is actually an extension of dualism, whereby the body and the mind are not only distinct but often competing conceptions of others. We often think of others not as bodies and minds but as bodies or minds.

			In contrast to vegetative states, death seems to focus our attention away from the body. Corpses disappear quickly, whether they are buried under beautiful grass or cremated and spread across mountain passes. Without a visible body, our thoughts are free to linger on the minds of the deceased in heaven or reincarnated as a small woodland creature. This means that focusing people’s attention upon dead bodies should decrease the mind ascribed to them, a theory we confirmed in an extension of Knickman’s thesis studies. As before, this study revealed that a patient who “passed away” was ascribed more mind than a patient in a “vegetative state”; however, this death-superiority effect disappeared when we mentioned that the deceased’s body was “embalmed at the local morgue and then buried six feet underground.” Thoughts of the body interfered with thoughts of the mind, just as dualism predicts.

			Our intuitive dualism not only paves the way for the belief in immortality but also prevents us from accepting the equivalence of mind and brain. How can deep feelings of love and hard-learned memories be mere patterns of electrical firing—ones that disappear as soon as the electricity is disconnected? If the mind equals the brain, then someone with a brain exactly like yours would be more than just similar to you—they would be exactly you. And if you could replicate your brain and body a million times over, then there would be a million of you, and each of them would have the rightful claim to your identity. Most people shudder at this extreme idea of duplication.

			To be fair, people also dislike even mild duplication. We may like similar-minded others, but when a friend likes all the same music, books, TV shows, and potential partners that we do, we get a little irked. The best illustration of this phenomenon is “hipsters.” Hipsters are typically young white professionals who like independent rock, mustaches, cheap sunglasses, and expensive fixed-gear bicycles. The irony is that they all do this, deriving conformity out of “uniqueness.” Indeed, nothing enrages a hipster more than labeling him or her a hipster, because it suggests interchangeability rather than individuality.

			Someone who shares all your preferences may be irritating, but not as much as another you. In a study conducted in our lab and led by graduate student Chelsea Schein, we asked people to imagine that they had been transported in a Star Trek–like transporter but that the original transporter had failed to destroy their old selves. Thus, there was a “you” standing on the Enterprise and a “you” standing on the surface of a far-flung planet. People invariably found this duplication of mind unsettling, just as dualism would predict, and were especially irked when imagining their clone sleeping with their spouse. Technically it’s not cheating, but it’s hard not to feel betrayed: your spouse owes allegiance to you—your specific mind—not to a body with your same brain.

			Duplicating your mind may be science fiction, but the opposite—its complete annihilation—is not. We call it “death.” Part of our discomfort with and confusion about death stems from dualism, which suggests that just as a mind cannot be duplicated, it also cannot be destroyed. Instead, mind seems to be a quantity that must always be conserved, just like energy or matter. Mind may be transformed to other forms—ghosts, spirits, reincarnation, the afterlife—but never truly destroyed. As evidence for this belief in conservation of mind, consider the many cultures that treat death as a simple journey between worlds, with funerals serving as preparation. Pharaohs were entombed with gold,12 Norse Vikings were burned with their swords,13 and one Ohio biker was recently buried upright on his Harley-Davidson, seemingly riding his hog into the afterlife.14

			Conservation of mind also suggests the remarkable phenomenon that those with more mind before death—i.e., who seem more capable of agency and experience—will also be ascribed more mind after death. Compare the death of an infant with the death of a teenager. Although both are tragedies, it is the teenager’s mind that persists among the living because of their richer mental life, including a more developed personality, hopes and fears, mannerisms, and sense of humor. With funding from the John Templeton Foundation, our lab has experimentally tested conservation of mind across death, focusing on the mental states someone possesses at the exact time of death. We hypothesized that minds dying while awake and lucid would persist more after death than minds asleep or otherwise muddled.

			Our studies revealed that, as predicted, people have more postmortem mind when they die while awake (versus asleep) or while on hallucinogens that enrich experiences (versus sedatives that dull experiences) or while in possession of all their mental capacities (versus in the grip of dementia). Highlighting the separation of mind and body, participants judged a victim of ALS (who died with a damaged body) to have more mind after death than a victim of Alzheimer’s (who died with a damaged mind). Importantly, these perceptions of mind also predicted moral judgments: participants judged it more important to keep promises made to those who died while awake (versus in a coma). These studies suggest that if you want people to follow your dying wishes, you should die clear-eyed and alert, capitalizing on conservation of mind.

			Adding to the many paradoxes about the mind club, conservation of mind suggests that membership is both fluid and stable. It is fluid because small differences in mind at the time of death fundamentally change perceptions of mind after death. It is stable because we use the mind in life as a firm anchor for understanding the mind in death.

			Speaking of paradox, as hard as it is to imagine your friends and family passing away, it may actually be impossible to imagine yourself dead.15 As we discussed in the section on affective forecasting in chapter 6 on the silent, we are poor at perceiving our own mind in the future. But how do we perceive our own mind at a time when it has completely vanished?

			If we assume that monism is true and death marks the disappearance of mind, then imagining yourself dead is like trying to imagine nothingness. You could imagine yourself without any thoughts or feelings, but your imagination (or “simulation”—the process we explored in chapter 4 on patients) is still from the point of view of you. In death there is no you to imagine, or even any imagination. Trying to perceive your dead mind is paradoxical, because you have to perceive a state that is incapable of perception—which is impossible while you are currently perceiving. It’s like trying to make a movie without using a camera. Of course, experiencing death is impossible only if you’re a monist, and there are certainly lots of dualists who think they have glimpsed the afterlife, such as Pam Reynolds.

			At the age of thirty-five, Pam Reynolds suffered a brain aneurysm that required emergency surgery. The odds of her survival were slim, especially because doctors were forced to induce hypothermic cardiac arrest, lowering her body temperature to fifty degrees so that her breathing and heartbeat stopped and the blood drained from her head. She was clinically dead for almost an entire hour. Shortly after surgery began, Reynolds found herself floating above the operating table, observing the doctors clearly enough that she could later report their conversation with startling accuracy.

			Like many of those who have near-death experiences (NDEs), she felt herself being pulled toward a bright light, where she saw deceased family members and even had an experience of God. Ultimately her long-deceased uncle pushed her away from the afterlife and back into her body, at which point her breathing and heartbeat resumed. But before that moment she displayed absolutely no evidence of any brain activity.16

			More recently, four-year-old Colton Burpo was in surgery for an appendectomy when he ostensibly died and slipped away to heaven, where he was able to confirm much of contemporary Christian thought about the place. In heaven no one was sick, and Jesus has a “rough but kind face, sea-blue eyes . . . a smile that lit up the heavens,” loves everyone very much, and rides a rainbow-colored horse. *17



					 						Figure 40: Ascent of the Blessed by Hieronymus Bosch

						Some describe this painting of the saved entering heaven as the first depiction of an NDE, with its light at the end of the tunnel.

						H. BOSCH, ASCENT OF THE BLESSED, 1490, HTTP://UPLOAD.WIKIMEDIA.ORG/WIKIPEDIA/COMMONS/THUMB/1/16/HIERONYMUS _BOSCH_013.JPG/262PX-HIERONYMUS _BOSCH_013.JPG.



				 			 			Unfortunately, Colton’s account of a Christian heaven is not an impartial audit, like the ones provided by physicists when inspecting the nuclear facilities of rogue states. Young children are notoriously impressionable, and Colton’s father is extremely religious, working as a pastor of Crossroads Wesleyan Church in Imperial, Nebraska. In fact, it was Colton’s father who wrote the book Heaven Is for Real: A Little Boy’s Astounding Story of His Trip to Heaven and Back through discussions with him.

			We can be sure that Colton’s father asked the right questions to confirm his Christian worldview—and reach the bestseller list—such as “And wasn’t Jesus bathed in a white light?” and “Was Grandma happy or really happy?” One wonders how the book would read if an ancient Greek had been the one doing the writing and interviewing: “Was the river Styx wide or really wide?” and “Was the three-headed dog Cerberus terrifying or really terrifying?”

			Some scientists, including Dr. Sam Parnia at Stony Brook University Hospital, have taken the near-death experiences of Pam Reynolds, Colton Burpo, and others as evidence for dualism because they involve mental functioning without observable brain activity.Many would be more than happy to agree with Parnia, including the Hollywood producers who made millions from the movie adaptation of Heaven Is for Real. But others are more reluctant to accept dualism.

			One of these dualism skeptics is Dr. Dean Mobbs, who explains the elements of NDEs with boring old biology.18 The experience of floating over your body can be generated by overstimulation of the right temporoparietal junction. The white light can be generated by retinal ischemia, caused by reduced blood supply to the eye. The mystical meeting of your grandparents may be the result of activity in the angular gyrus or abnormal levels of dopamine in the brain. Meanwhile, the sense of peace and acceptance of death is very similar to the experiences one has under the influence of powerful drugs such as ketamine or amphetamine.19 With the flood of neurotransmitters released during NDEs, it’s no surprise that the experience is similar to that of drug use.

			Despite these prosaic explanations of NDEs, a single number once argued in favor of dualism and the continuing life of the soul: twenty-one. This number has nothing to do with blackjack or the legal drinking age but instead is the apparent weight of the soul. In 1907 Dr. Duncan MacDougall placed a man dying of tuberculosis on a very delicate scale and intently watched the dial as his heart slowed to a stop. As the man’s body released his last breath, the good doctor noticed that his patient lost twenty-one grams in weight, which MacDougall interpreted to be his escaping soul.

			Seeking to generalize this finding, MacDougall put a dying dog on the scale but failed to find the same loss of weight upon its death,20 suggesting either that the original reading was in error or perhaps that man’s best friend is soulless.* Another study rumored to test for the weight of the soul involved earthworms and a blender. The premise was simple: put a blender on a sensitive scale, add some earthworms, and then turn it on and watch for a decrease in weight as their souls escape. Like the canine study, this study didn’t reveal any weight changes, but that’s unproblematic unless you believe that “all nematodes go to heaven.” Alas, the twenty-one-gram loss from human death was never replicated, but even if it were, it wouldn’t support dualism. Dualism suggests that we all have an immaterial soul, and immaterial souls don’t have weight because weight depends on mass, and mass is a feature of matter.

			Whether grinding up innocent earthworms is justified for science, it certainly seems cruel. Nevertheless, it is always possible to be crueler. If you had to guess, what’s the cruelest thing you can say to a young child? That the Easter Bunny isn’t real? That Santa Claus is really her parents? That her finger paintings are pedestrian and her ballet dancing mediocre? No, probably the nastiest thing you can tell her is that one day everyone she knows and loves—her mom, her dad, her pet dog, and her best friend—will die. And one day she too will die; her candle will be snuffed out by the fickle wind of fate. The other insults she would eventually forget, but the specter of inevitable death is undeniable and deeply unsettling.*

			Of course, children have heard of death before. We have a colleague whose six-year-old daughter was in school when the teacher said, “Remember, class, every problem has a solution.”

			Since it wasn’t a question, the teacher was surprised when Janette put up her hand. “Yes, Janette?”

			“I know one problem that doesn’t.”

			“You probably just need help thinking about a solution. What’s the problem?”

			“Death.” A letter was sent home to the parents.

			Even when kids know about the inevitability of death, their innate dualism leads them to think of it merely as a transition. Unfortunately, the monist explanation favored by scientists suggests that once your brain turns off, so too do you. This not only violates our beliefs about conservation of mind but also poses a powerful existential conundrum: If we all die in the end, then what does it matter what we do in life? Why bother working hard to get that degree, promotion, or raise when forty years from now, give or take, you will be dead, and in another forty after that, you and everything you’ve ever done will likely be forgotten? Faced with this terrible truth, what gets us out of bed in the morning?

			This very question was pondered by a German sociologist named Ernest Becker, who suggested that the knowledge of our own death is a defining characteristic of our species.21 Animals certainly seem to lack a sense of their impending demise. Take salmon. They are so exhausted by swimming up mountain streams to spawn that they die right after releasing their eggs and sperm.22 Likewise, the male praying mantis often has his head bitten off during foreplay (before headlessly mounting the female).23 If you were a male praying mantis, you might think, “That praying mantis lady sure looks fine, but I think I’ll stick with back issues of Play-mantis and keep my head.” However, if animals recognized their impending doom, their species would lose the game of evolution. Without suicidal spawning and sexing, there would be no future salmon or praying mantises, and so species are better off if their members aren’t aware of death.

			Unfortunately, humans have powerful brains that cannot help but realize the relentlessness of death, a realization that poses a challenge for the propagation of our species. If we each recognize the futility of our lives, then why slave at monotonous jobs to provide for our children, who also require us to forgo sleep and adult conversation? In other words, why bother propagating our species? The very short answer is that we are designed to seldom think of this question. We rarely think, “I want to approach this woman and ask for her number, but what about the inevitable annihilation of my consciousness?” In fact, Becker suggests (echoing Sigmund Freud)24 that the human mind actively represses thoughts of death.

			Becker believed that thoughts of death are terrifying and immobilizing, and how we deal with such terror is the research project of a handful of psychologists who have developed “Terror Management Theory.”25 They suggest that we cope with the terror of death in two ways. The first is by thinking that we—or, more technically, our minds—will literally never die, that our consciousness will persist in the great beyond, perhaps to be contacted by John Edward at a taped psychic reading. The second way of coping with the terror of death is by thinking that we will achieve symbolic immortality through the success of our culture. This route to immortality acknowledges that our consciousness will be snuffed out but takes comfort that at least other similar minds will live on.

			Literal immortality was the dream of every conquistador who quested through the Amazon jungle looking for the fountain of youth. Stories of adventurers seeking immortality go as far back as the legends of Alexander the Great, who braved the Land of Darkness in the hope of finding the Water of Life.26 It is also the dream of every scientist who studies ways to slow the biological process of aging, including resveratrol,27 low stress,28 calorie restriction,29 and social support.30 But even if we moved our family and friends to a lazy town in Ikaria*31 and consumed nothing but vegetables, olive oil, and red wine, our bodies would still fail eventually.

			As currently slated-for-death humans, we might console ourselves with the idea that somehow, someday, science will succeed in making people live forever. But how much do you really care about your great-great-great-great-great-grandson? That future kid has less than 1 percent genetic overlap with you, so you would rather live forever yourself. Currently the only two possible options for personal immortality are either waiting patiently in cryogenic storage for science to put a stop to aging or spurring computers on to the singularity so that our consciousnesses can be uploaded (as we discussed in chapter 3 on machines).

			Taking the cryogenic option was Dick Clair, an Emmy-winning Hollywood writer who worked on the most popular shows of the 1970s, including The Mary Tyler Moore Show, The Bob Newhart Show, and The Carol Burnett Show. Clair was diagnosed with AIDS in 1986, and knowing that his remaining time would be short, he contracted Alcor—an Arizona-based nonprofit organization—to vitrify (cool to the point of solidification) his body upon death. Despite fierce opposition from the hospital, a court decision finally allowed Alcor to grant Clair’s wishes. He now resides in a custom-designed capsule bathed in liquid nitrogen at –196°C, a temperature that keeps Clair’s body in stasis indefinitely, until the technology is available for his resurrection and recovery. Other members cryogenically suspended at Alcor’s facility include Jerry Leaf (Alcor’s ex–vice president), the futurist FM-2030 (his actual name), and baseball hall-of-famer Ted Williams (and his son John Henry). You too can join the cryonics club by preserving your whole body for $200,000 or just your head for only $80,000.



					 						Figure 41: Literal Immortality

						The Fountain of Youth, as depicted by Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472–1553).





					 						Figure 42: An Alcor “Dewar”

						An insulated storage unit for vitrified patients.



				 			 			Liquid nitrogen may provide bodily immortality, but most people are content with living on only via their minds in the afterlife. Studies reveal that just the idea of the afterlife decreases the fear of death—even in atheists.32 You might therefore expect highly religious folks to be sanguine about death. If you are convinced of the existence of heaven—and your qualification for admission—then death should be no big deal. If anything, it should be embraced, as it allows you to leave this physical world of suffering and head straight to the ethereal empyrean realm.

			Two studies investigated whether the religious embrace death by examining doctors’ decisions regarding terminally ill patients. Religious doctors, regardless of faith, turned out to be significantly less likely to perform procedures that would hasten the death of terminal patients, even those suffering from excruciating pain.33 And those who believed most firmly in a paradise-like afterlife—religious fundamentalists—were the most likely to request heroic lifesaving measures, even if they were painful and humiliating and were likely to prolong life by only a week or so.34 These hardly seem like the decisions of those convinced of heaven. Instead these data suggest that people may be religious in the first place because they are terrified of death. In support of this idea, one study found that people made to think about their own death increased their belief in God.35

			Of course, not everyone believes in God, but even hardened nonbelievers like Richard Dawkins can still cheat annihilation through symbolic immortality. In contrast to literal immortality, which suggests the continued existence of your consciousness, symbolic immortality suggests the continued existence of other similar minds—and those symbols you all believe in, like science, truth, freedom, and the great U.S. of A. When people die for a “cause,” they are demonstrating symbolic immortality.

			To test this idea, terror-management theorist Tom Pyszczynski and colleagues had people read an essay supporting open immigration either on a normal city sidewalk or in front of a funeral home. They hypothesized that reminders of death would lead people to identify strongly with their nationality—Go America!—and therefore see foreigners as threatening. As predicted, people evaluated the proimmigrant argument more harshly when they read it in front of the funeral home,36 demonstrating that death makes us protective of our own cultures and values.

			This isn’t as strange as it may seem. We tell soldiers that even though they may die on the battlefield, they will live on through their deeds and the triumph of their country. This is why many are so offended by the burning of Old Glory: you are destroying not just a piece of fabric but the symbol for which so many have given their lives. To quote Representative Henry Hyde during a 1995 debate on an amendment to ban flag burning: “A young man thousands of miles away from home . . . who died defending freedom. How do you honor, how do you glorify that? You honor Old Glory on behalf of that hero.”37

			In addition to condemning flag burning, death makes us identify with the most dominant cultural group. Reminding people of mortality causes them to accept racism toward an out-group,38 to criticize those who oppose their political views, to perceive more similarity to those who share their gender,39 and to punish rule breakers.40 As reminders of death seem to make people anti-immigration, profamily, and pro–rule following—that is, Republican—it makes sense that people primed with death were more likely to express support for George W. Bush over John Kerry in the 2004 election.

			More generally, those who see the world as more threatening lean more conservative,41 and death is the ultimate threat. The link between perceptions of threat and conservatism provides some perspective on findings that conservatism increases with age42—the older you are, the closer you are to death. Symbolic immortality suggests that the fear of death depends upon how you spend your last days—the more you contribute to your culture, the less terror you are likely to feel. To misquote Horace Mann’s 1859 address to Antioch College, “You will be afraid to die until you have won some victory for humanity.”*

			Existential terror can explain why people themselves want to live on, but it leaves open the question of why we continue to see the minds of deceased others. Not everyone believes in ghosts, but many people do believe in the continued presence of deceased individuals, if only in their minds. After losing someone we know, we often continue to simulate their minds so vividly that it is difficult to think of them as truly gone. We wonder what they might be thinking, hope that they might be proud of us, and are scared that they might be angry.

			Grief and feelings of unfinished business are reasons why close others live on in our minds, but people also see the dead even when they don’t know or love them—especially if they are good or evil. Imagine you are sitting around a campfire one night when a local guide starts to tell you about some strange happenings in the surrounding woods, now thick with fog. Apparently, not far from where you’re sitting people have reported feeling a brooding presence, heaviness in the air, and an unnatural silence. You begin to feel it too, and out of the corner of your eye you see a flicker of motion, but when you quickly turn, there is nothing there but an ominous swirling of mist. The guide mentions the word “ghost” and you and your friends draw closer together, leaning in toward the fire and away from the expansive darkness. You quietly ask, “Whose ghost?” and the guide tells you that in life the ghost’s name was Ed Kowalski, a local plumber who loved reality TV and homemade pierogi. Suddenly the ghost seems much less plausible.

			When we think of ghosts, we think of those who have done evil in their lives; our studies bear this out. We asked people to imagine that they were in a place where they felt strange emotions, a sensation of a presence, and changes in the atmosphere. We then asked the participants to describe the kind of spirit that might cause these sensations, and sure enough they often described people who were evil in life, using descriptors like “hateful,” “violent,” and “psychopathic.” This persistence of evil is consistent not only with horror movies but also with conceptions of the afterlife. People believe that good people—and normal people—go on to heaven, whereas the souls—and minds—of the evil remain trapped on Earth.

			Good people also appear to live on after death, but not in the same way. When we asked people to rate what happened to heroes such as Mother Teresa, they didn’t think that they would be experienced as the same tangible presence. Instead they believed that good people live on more abstractly, within all of our hearts. As most people see themselves as fundamentally good, they are happy to assimilate heroes into their own self-concept. It may be only wishful thinking, but many like to see their own good deeds as continuing the work of their role models. In contrast, villains seem to have so little overlap with us that we think of them as completely distinct and feel them as a brooding threat to us. Good people live on in our hearts, and evil people live on in our basements.

			The continued presence of good or evil people is rooted in the phenomenon of moral typecasting, introduced in chapter 4 on patients. Those who do good or evil are perceived as especially agentic and less vulnerable to harm. Not only do heroes and villains seem harder to harm and harder to kill, but even once they are killed, their minds seems to resist complete dissolution.

			A thread running through our discussion of the dead is the perceived stability of minds after death. We acknowledge that people can be changed through life-altering events (by definition) and can shift their perspective and priorities after a brush with death. However, minds are perceived as changing little after actual death, and the spirits of the dead seem very similar to who they were in life: people evil in life become vengeful spirits, and people good in life provide a benevolent presence. Work by psychologist Scott Allison finds that perceptions of death are forever frozen in time and are even resistant to new information revealed postmortem.

			In one study participants learned one fact about a fictional woman named Eleanor Dripp that was either positive (helping a stranger) or negative (cheating on her husband). Participants then learned either that Dripp was still alive or that she had died. Finally, they learned whichever of the two facts about her they hadn’t been told before. So if participants first read about her helping a stranger, they then read about her infidelity, and if they had first read about her infidelity, they then read about her helpfulness. Allison found that on hearing the second fact about Dripp, people adjusted their opinions of her much less if they had first learned that she was dead, and the same result was found with other real-life targets.43

			The minds of others in death stay as we knew them in life, even if we knew them only briefly, which explains our resistance to thinking better of people we knew as villains or thinking worse of those we knew as heroes. Not only do people’s moral characters freeze at death, but we also tend to exaggerate who they were—the good becoming truly heroic and the bad becoming truly evil.44 Minds may be insubstantial and invisible, but they seem to thicken and solidify after death, becoming more concrete and extreme.

			This increased extremity after death also occurs in nonmoral domains. If a good musician suddenly dies at the peak of his career, he becomes the best to have ever lived. This is why members of the “twenty-seven club”—musicians who died at age twenty-seven—are remembered as so legendary. Jim Morrison, Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, Kurt Cobain, and Amy Winehouse might not seem as amazing if we could watch them for an additional forty years. Seeing 1969 Jimi Hendrix play the national anthem with his guitar behind his back at Woodstock is incredible. Seeing 2009 Jimi Hendrix shilling for AARP after a sad money-grabbing comeback tour would be less than incredible.

			Although people exaggerate and freeze the moral characters of heroes and villains in death, when it concerns more average people there is a tendency to think of them as somewhat kinder. When someone dies, we typically remember the good things about them, such as their smile, their laugh, their love for their family, and their successes at work, and not how they could be petty or selfish or bitter, or how they sometimes hurt those close to them with callous remarks. As proof, just take a look at newspaper obituaries, in which people praise the “warmth,” “kindness,” and “generosity” of the deceased. People don’t want to speak ill of the dead, perhaps because they are afraid of vengeful spirits or because they pity them as moral patients who have suffered the ultimate harm.

			The aversion to maligning the dead appears to extend to disrespecting their wishes. When someone makes a deathbed request (e.g., “Avenge my death”), people seem to feel obligated to fulfill it, despite the fact that the person now doesn’t care (or certainly cares less than when living). We seem to consider the dead’s minds as not only persisting but also having moral rights, as is consistent with the deep connection between mind perception and morality revealed way back in chapter 1. We think that the dead can be harmed through defacing their graves or breaking promises to them, and we try to follow their wills to the letter of the law. When people give all their money away to their cat, society tries to respect that request instead of spending the money on something more useful, like fighting malaria or childhood poverty. That we would respect the agency of the dead over the suffering of the living is one more quirk of mind perception.

			Whether in bustling and brightly lit television studios or in the quiet and dim bedrooms we used to share with spouses, we cannot help but perceive the minds of those who have left us. Seeing the minds of dead others not only is a natural continuation of seeing their living minds but also is supported by intuitions of dualism and conservation of mind. With our own minds it is annihilation of mind that we fear most, but luckily we are typically able to suppress this fear with the help of religion and culture.

			Try as we might, it is impossible to imagine our minds in death, and this paradox is mirrored by another paradox of the mind club. Minds are insubstantial during life, but after death we somehow perceive them as more solid and less changeable. In the past chapters we have emphasized the importance of cues to mind such as expressive features, language, and purposeful behavior. Each of these are physical manifestations of mind, but the dead suggest that minds can be completely disconnected from physical reality. In death the less we tie minds to physical bodies, the more they persist.

			The club of dead minds seems to hinge more upon how people are remembered in life than on biological fact, but the disconnection of mind perception from externally verifiable mental capacities is true for many cryptominds, especially for the most contentious of all cryptominds: God.





Chapter 9


			GOD





In the seventeenth century the French philosopher Blaise Pascal was trying to decide whether he should believe in God. Rather than look skyward for a sign, Pascal looked to logic. He came up with a small table—or matrix—to help him decide. He divided it vertically based on whether he believed in God, with the top row representing “believe” and the bottom row representing “do not believe.” He then divided it horizontally based on whether God existed, with the left column representing “does not exist” and the right column representing “exists.”

			First Pascal wondered what would happen if God didn’t exist. If he wrongly believed in Him, he would feel compelled to live a prudish life, missing out on many delightful but sinful experiences, such as Las Vegas and French wine. Then at the end of his ascetic life—without a God to provide an afterlife—death would mean the end of the story. This scenario would be assigned a score of –80, one negative point for every year of austerity. Alternatively, if God didn’t exist and Pascal correctly disbelieved in him, then he would have eighty years of delicious debauchery and scintillating sin, giving an overall life score of +80.

			If God exists, however, the calculations substantially change, because of the existence of an afterlife. Correctly believing in God still yields a boring, prudish life (–80), but these dull years of following His commandments also yield an eternal afterlife in heaven. If we assign one positive point for every year in heaven, then we have +1 × ∞ = +∞, and if we combine life and afterlife, we get –80 + ∞, which still equals +∞. Conversely, failing to correctly believe in God still gives the joy of lusty living (+80) but is offset by an afterlife of eternal suffering in hell (–∞), and combining these values yields –∞, which completes the final cell of the table (see figure 43). The smart choice should now be obvious. If there is any doubt in your mind about whether God exists, you should hedge your bets and act as if He does exist, lest you be sent to hell forever. Pascal argued that believing in God was simply the rational thing to do.1

			 				 					 						 							 								 								 								 							 							 								 									 									 										God does not exist

									 									 										God exists



								 									 										Believe in God

									 									 										−80

									 									 									 ∞



								 									 										Do not believe in God

									 									 									 80

									 									 										−∞





					 						Figure 43: Pascal’s Wager

						The numbers count the good or bad years of a decision to believe (or not) given whether God exists (or not).





			Of course, rational calculation is not what people typically cite as the source of their faith. People don’t sit down with their financial adviser and, while picking mutual funds, pause to ask whether they should believe in the Almighty. God is not something that you approach with cold mathematical logic. Instead, belief is something intuitive, emotional, and—for many people—powerfully obvious. Christian philosopher Søren Kierkegaard is quoted as having said, “Life is not a problem to be solved, but a reality to be experienced,”2 and the same applies to how people perceive God. People don’t think about God so much as perceive His presence in their lives. Just as you cannot help but perceive the minds of people—despite the possibility that they ultimately may not exist—people cannot help but perceive God, despite the fact that He might not exist. Even Pascal, with his wager, took the existence of God as a given.3

			God is many things to many people, but to all of them He is a mind. Just like the humans who believe in Him, God is perceived as being able to think and feel, and people wonder what He intends for the future and feel His love for them. Although His mind is very humanlike, He is also different from humans in many important ways. He is perceived as knowing more than anyone else and as being exempt from many of the emotions and sensations that humans feel, such as embarrassment, hunger, and lust. This explains why chapter 1’s mind survey revealed that God is perceived as being very high in agency but relatively low in experience.4

			As we’ll soon see, one reason for God’s uniquely agentic mind is His importance in morality. God seems not to care what color socks we wear but to care a lot about our cheating on our taxes and coveting our neighbor’s new car. The reason for God’s moral preoccupation comes from the idea of (agentic) dyadic completion, which, if you remember, is the idea that suffering compels us to see powerful moral agents. God’s moral bent also stems from the fact that large-scale cooperation helps cultures to crush their enemies. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. To understand why people perceive God’s mind, we must begin in the mists of human prehistory—or, more technically, the tall grasslands of human prehistory—with “the mystery of the rustling grass.”

			Imagine you are a prehistoric man or woman walking through the darkness of the savanna one night when you suddenly hear a mysterious rustling in the grass. You freeze and consider two different options. The first is to run like the dickens, and the second is to continue leisurely on your merry way. If the rustling signals a lion, you should run, but if it’s just the wind, then you should keep walking. But what happens if you guess wrong? If you run and it’s just the wind, then you’ll look pretty stupid when you arrive back in your village flushed and out of breath. On the other hand, if you keep walking and there’s a lion, then looking stupid is the least of your concerns because you’ll soon be dinner.

			If you think about it, this scenario is exactly like Pascal’s wager because of a massive asymmetry in outcomes. Just as the threat of eternal suffering makes it rational to believe in God, the threat of death makes it rational to always assume that there is a lion in the grass. This cost/benefit ratio is just the kind of thing upon which natural selection operates, such that “lion assumers” generally live longer and pass on more genes than “lion ignorers.” The same principle holds whether we are taking about lions, tigers, or bears.* Evolution has selected for people who in ambiguous situations are likely to perceive agents—those self-directed minds that could eat or otherwise harm them.

			More specifically, evolution has endowed our prehistoric ancestors—and us—with a hyperactive agency-detection device (HADD) that makes us acutely sensitive to the possibility of agents in our environment.5 Of course, in today’s world we are seldom at risk of being eaten by predators, but the HADD still works as well as ever. When you are home alone at night and hear a strange noise from your backyard, you instantly think of a serial killer and not a gust of wind. And when you feel a soft twitching on your face, you instantly think of a spider and not a stray piece of hair.

			This hardwired tendency to detect earthy agents also makes us detect supernatural agents. When a branch snaps in a dark forest, it might be a bear, or it might be the ghost of a murdered camper. As we saw in the previous chapter, people often assume that these supernatural agents are dangerous. For example, Japanese Buddhism speaks of the jikininki, spirits of the evil dead who come back at night to devour human corpses,6 and the ancient Greeks spoke of the Keres, spirits who would fly over battlefields and descend upon wounded soldiers to drink their blood and send them to Hades.7



				 				 					 						Figure 44: Pascal’s Logic Applied to the “Mystery of the Rustling Grass”

						It makes sense to generally assume the presence of an agent.



		 			 			The reason for this assumed supernatural malevolence is the same reason behind the HADD: if you have to guess the intentions of someone, it’s best to stay on guard and assume that they’re out to get you. Consider again the mystery midnight noise in the backyard. You typically don’t think, “Great! Someone is sneaking around to leave me a big pile of money!” Instead you think about a depraved criminal who plans to do terrible things to you and your pets.

			Although threatening situations predispose people to see agents, people will also perceive them at more relaxed times, such as when lying on their backs, staring at faces in the clouds.8 Part of this perception stems from apophenia, the general tendency of our minds to make meaning out of the meaningless. At its most extreme this can be a symptom of schizophrenia, such as when people believe that individuals wearing red ties are part of a vast communist conspiracy to overthrow the government (as in the case of Nobel Prize–winning mathematician and paranoid schizophrenic John Nash).9 A less extreme form of apophenia involves the idea of divination, in which you can see hints of the future through patterns of tea leaves, tarot cards, or runes. For example, in ancient Rome religious figures known as haruspices performed divination by examining the entrails of sacrificed sheep, particularly their livers.10 Each of these cases of apophenia typically involves supernatural agents, as people believed that spirits and gods were speaking through the cards (or sheep organs). Even modern people seem to feel the presence of supernatural agents in mundane objects—like a navel orange.

			On Christmas morning 2009, Lockport, New York, resident Paul Kulniszewski ate his usual breakfast orange. But on that anniversary of Christ’s birth, cutting his orange in half yielded a miracle: Jesus and Mary suddenly appeared. No, they didn’t walk into his kitchen to share some slices, but instead they appeared in the orange. The cross section of the orange revealed a pattern of slices and pith that looked like Jesus on the cross with Mary kneeling before Him. Although Kulniszewski’s interpretation could be disputed, he is not alone in seeing God around him. In fact, there was a woman who belonged to the very same church as Kulniszewski who saw the Virgin Mary in a recently trimmed maple tree. People came from all across upstate New York to behold the arboreal form of the mother of God.



					 						Figure 45: Vitamin D and Divinity

						Do you see Jesus and Mary in this orange?

						PAUL KULNISZEWSKI



				 			 			Other examples of this divine apophenia include Linda Lowe, who saw Jesus in a piece of toast;11 Ernesto Garza, who saw Christ in a breakfast taco;12 and Jim Mize, who saw Jesus and the Virgin Mary in a Funyun.*13 Whether any of these objects truly reflect divine presence is debatable, but it is clear that such sightings bring people together and strengthen their faith. People undoubtedly feel a deeper sense of human connection when beholding Jesus toast than when beholding mere toast. The ability of the divine to bring people together is no accident. Researchers suggest that our propensity to detect supernatural agents—especially God—may have evolved for this very reason.

			Let’s return to the mists of evolution. When we were here before, we discussed how hyperactive agency detection allows us to avoid threats from hungry animals, which better allows our genes to propagate. For prehistoric humans wild animals were only the start of their problems. With no Gore-Tex, hiking boots, or Siri to ask “Which way to the closest warm shelter?” life was pretty grim for Homo sapiens. If you want to see for yourself, just take off your clothes and go live alone on the savanna. Unless you have some specialized Navy SEAL training, you’d probably last less than a week. We don’t mean to malign your survival skills, but it’s difficult for anyone to survive anywhere completely alone. Like it or not, humans are a social species, and although that means dealing with body odor on the subway, it also means an increased ability to propagate our genes.

			Think about it—how is it that a slow, scrawny, clawless, furless biped with a terrible sense of smell got to rule the world? Our big brains helped, but the real reason is that we do things together.14 Any one person alone is pretty pitiable, but put people together into a big enough group and they can do almost anything. Groups of people can build city walls for protection, farms for food, and hospitals for health care, all of which help their genes thrive. Importantly, group living affords these benefits only when people work together, putting aside some of their own selfish desires in the service of others. You may not want to sit in the car’s middle seat, but unless someone does, your group will never make it to the concert.

			In the terms of evolution, individual genetic fitness requires collective success, which in turn requires collective cooperation. Of course, as team projects, life with roommates, and chapter 7 on groups revealed, groups also encourage selfishness and slacking off. Why work to help others when they will work to help you? Living in groups allows you to reap benefits without putting in effort. Unfortunately, if everyone recognizes this fact, and everyone is selfish, then everyone is worse off. When cooperation dissolves in shared houses, no one pays the rent, no one does the dishes or takes out the trash, and life descends into filthy chaos. When cooperation dissolves in whole societies, catastrophe results, and so evolution needs mechanisms for making people cooperate.15

			In small societies like individual tribes, these cooperation-inducing mechanisms include gossip, ostracism, and punishment.16 People who act selfishly in small communities are subject to penalties from simple name-calling to exile. The benefit of small groups is that everyone knows everyone else, and so it’s easy to keep tabs on other people, whether by observing them directly or through hearsay. However, the downside of these small societies is that they can’t accomplish as much as big societies. When your entire tribe consists of only ninety people, it’s hard to build hospitals, roads, and universities. Accordingly, evolution has favored bigger societies, but this has led to a cooperation problem.

			In big societies it is impossible for everyone to keep tabs on one another. Anthropological research suggests that we can have stable relationships with only approximately 150 people, which explains why most social groups like fraternities, military companies, and HOAs have no more than this many members. When social groups do grow beyond this size, they typically split by forming a new chapter, another company, or a separate HOA. In fact, this number is so consistent across social groups that it’s called “Dunbar’s number” after Robin Dunbar, the anthropologist who discovered it.17 It likely also applies to you. If you made a list of all the people you know (not all your Facebook friends, but just the ones whose ongoing life events you know by heart), you probably wouldn’t make it past 150.

			In terms of cooperation, Dunbar’s number means that if you’re living in a big city like New York, it is impossible to know who is a good cooperator, let alone informally enforce cooperation. One way big societies get around this anonymity is with laws and police forces that suppress anticooperation tendencies, but they can arrest people only in extremely obvious cases like murder and theft. Even then, many criminals escape blame because of the high burden of proof for conviction. What big societies need to really enforce cooperation is a powerful police force that knows not only people’s every action but also their every thought.

			One possibility is an Orwellian thought police and a secret network of spies, but an even better solution is God. Even if someone can deceive other people and disguise his selfishness to others, God can see directly into his mind—and is able to punish him with eternal suffering. The evolutionary importance of cooperation is why God seems to care more about your morality than about your hobbies. Working together and suppressing selfishness is essential to the success of societies and the individuals living within them. Without close neighbors to observe actions, big, anonymous societies need an all-seeing, all-powerful divine judge. In support of this idea, psychologists Ara Norenzayan and Azim Shariff examined the characteristics ascribed to God across many different human societies, from the small tribes of aboriginal populations to the bustling cities of America.18 They found that in the small tribes God is perceived as having a very different mind than He does in big societies like ours.

			The gods of small tribes are seen as relatively less powerful and knowledgeable than the God of the Western world. These small gods are not omniscient or omnipotent like our Western gods, and often their power is limited to the village borders. You can even trick these gods and hide your sins from them. However, as the size of societies increases, Norenzayan and Shariff found that their gods also increase in power, knowledge, and moral orientation.19 In the largest and most anonymous societies, such as the United States, God is “big”—He is omniscient and omnipotent and has very strict ideas about what you ought to do.

			The concept of sin and punishment features very prominently in Christianity and other Abrahamic religions, and the gravest sins are those that put one’s own interests above social harmony, such as murder, adultery, theft, and jealousy. In Dante’s “Inferno,” the lowest levels of hell are occupied by those who betrayed their families, their friends, and their lords.20

			Not only does believing in God come with the specter of Hell, but unlike other people, God cannot be tricked. Like Santa Claus, God is always watching your behavior and keeping a list of all your naughty deeds. Feeling watched by God has the same effect on our behavior as being watched by other people—we suddenly feel self-aware and are more likely to act in socially desirable ways.21 Even more than God, another supernatural mind—the Devil—offers a powerful corrective against wrongdoing, because he most vividly represents the punishment for selfishness: an eternity in hell.

			In early thought Satan lacked the supernatural powers—and evilness—he is now seen as possessing. The original translation of the Hebrew word satan means something like a stumbling block that stands in the way of achieving a goal. Although this obstruction can be negative, it can also be positive, such as when God places barriers in people’s path to imprudent actions. As God became more powerful and moralizing, so too did Satan become more immoral, and the idea of stumbling transformed into “the fall” from grace.22 A study led by Azim Shariff revealed that across the nations of the world, the more people believe in hell the lower the national crime rate.23 A loving, forgiving God may make people feel safe and secure, but it is the threat of hell that makes people moral.

			Everyday people seem to recognize the link between religious belief and acting morally, because they distrust atheists. Polling data shows that when it comes to electing a president, Americans are less comfortable with an atheist than with someone of a different race, gender, or sexual orientation.24 They believe that without God to direct their moral compass, atheists are morally depraved.25 In one study psychologist Will Gervais and colleagues found that people rated the morality of atheists as no different from that of convicted rapists.26 One conservative Web site claims, “Not possessing a religious basis for morality, atheists are fundamentally incapable of having a coherent system of morality”—which supposedly makes atheists likely pedophiles.27 Of course, there is no evidence to suggest that atheists are any less moral than believers. In fact, many of the most violent conflicts in history have been perpetrated in the name of the Almighty.

			God’s ostensible support of war comes again from the importance of group coordination in evolution. In the evolutionary landscape, people and their genes were threatened not only by wild animals and lazy individuals but also by rival groups. As we saw in chapter 5 on the enemy, when resources become scarce or tensions are high, it takes little to prompt one group to attempt the destruction or enslavement of a competing group. The winning group is then free to enjoy the spoils of victory, spreading both their genes and their religion.

			The most functional religions, therefore, are ones that encourage not only intragroup cooperation but also intergroup dominance. Consistent with this idea, one study conducted by psychologists Jesse Preston and Ryan Ritter found that although priming people with God-related words makes them nicer to out-group members (consistent with how God would like us to act), priming them with religion-related words leads to an us-over-them mentality.28 This may explain why the most religious Americans are also the most likely to advocate for violent military conflict, except, again, if explicitly reminded of God’s desire for us to behave compassionately.29

			Although atheists often bemoan religion-induced aggression, consider the point of view of the religion itself. Imagine that you are a god with your own religion and you are competing for believers with lots of other gods, each with their own religions. In other words, you are a religious entrepreneur. How should you design your religion and brand yourself to earn maximum market capitalization?*

			First, you want to encourage your members to have a lot of children, because they are easily indoctrinated and typically adopt the views of their parents.30 Second, you want to encourage missionaries to spread your Word across the land and reach new markets. A religion with no children and no missionaries would die as soon as its current believers die.

			Third, you would want to have reasonably unique views—a distinct brand—to ensure that your religion stands out from others. Research in marketing finds that brand distinctiveness is a key to luring customers and outcompeting competitors, and religion is no different.31 Fourth, you would want to discourage dissent or free thinking, since free thinking could lead people to believe in gods other than you. Fifth and finally, you would want to destroy any other competing religions, whether through marketing campaigns, lawsuits, or outright violence.

			Regardless of their ultimate truth, religions that have many or all of these features tend to outcompete rival religions. Consider the world’s most popular religion: Christianity. Both Catholicism and Evangelical Protestantism encourage kids and missionaries, the reliance on authority—whether through the pope or the unchanging Bible—and the occasional use of violence against threats. These principles can also explain why Mormonism is one of the fastest-growing religions in the United States, with an increase of 45.5 percent from 2000 to 2010.32

			Mormonism encourages many children, formalizes missionary work by sending young men abroad to spread the Word, and also takes a large annual tithe (10 percent of income) to help build the church’s influence and support group projects. Although Christian, Mormons also have unique views, believing that Jesus came to the New World after his crucifixion and that the angel Moroni revealed a set of golden tablets to Joseph Smith in upstate New York.33 Mormons have also used violence to protect their views, such as in the Mountain Meadows massacre, which left dead a hundred men, women, and children.34

			The spreading power of Mormonism makes sense if you consider the environment of intense religious competition in which it was formed. During the years 1790–1840, America was in the midst of what scholars now call the Second Great Awakening.35 The number of religious movements in the young country exploded, as did the number of new converts. Mormonism was engaged in intense competition with other new faiths, including those of the Baptists, Shakers, Adventists, and Presbyterians, and it survived only because it was well structured to survive in the religious marketplace.

			One general rule for helping supernatural ideas stick is “minimal counterintuitiveness,” when religious concepts are surprising but not too surprising. Consider two different hypothetical supernatural agents. The first is a seemingly normal man named Kitus, who can make himself invisible, hear any conversation on Earth, and be killed only by making him eat a plant grown deep in the Amazon rain forest. The second is a life-form named R443TTS that frequently looks like a thick paste but can also transform into a feathered hat. It speaks only in clicks and whistles, eats only nickels from 1979, and visits other universes every other Tuesday in months that end with -er.

			Which one would you guess has more cognitive staying power? If you said the first, you are right (and might consider calling yourself “prophet”). People tend to believe in agents that are mostly normal—Kitus is just a person with a couple of special characteristics, whereas R443TTS is abnormal in every respect. Minimally counterintuitive agents are those that fit squarely into our category of “agent” (or person) but are just a bit different, which makes them emotionally evocative. A similar process was at work in chapter 3 on machines with the uncanny valley, where robots that looked almost human were the most attention grabbing.

			Minimal counterintuitiveness can help explain why more people are Christians than are Scientologists: Jesus was a reasonably normal guy who died for your sins, whereas Xenu was an alien dictator who came to Earth (aka “Teegeeack”) 75 million years ago and used hydrogen bombs to obliterate millions of his people near active volcanoes.

			Religions may have qualities that help them spread from mind to mind, but they must also help their believers in return. One important benefit of believing in a powerful supernatural agent is that belief furnishes people with a sense of control in an otherwise random world. As we saw in chapter 3 on machines, uncertainty makes people see mind because minds are relatively easy to understand. Consider the question of why earthquakes happen. One reason, provided by geophysicists, stems from the instability of subduction zones, in which one tectonic plate dives under another and releases a tremendous amount of energy. While technically true, a better explanation for earthquakes—psychologically speaking—is that they are expressions of God’s anger. This explanation also affords a sense of control, as earthquakes can be avoided as long as God stays happy.

			The need for control and the belief in God may help explain why the wealthy are the least religious. Of Americans making under $10,000 a year, 83.8 percent report some belief in God, with 64.7 percent being strong believers. In contrast, only 68.7 percent of Americans making over $150,000 report some belief in God, with only 40.2 percent being strong believers.36 The wealthy feel control and agency in their day-to-day lives and so have little need for divine order. In contrast, those struggling with poverty face a number of challenges in their day-to-day lives, and the comfort of a caring creator may serve to create order in an otherwise chaotic world.37

			Even children look to the supernatural when they are uncertain. In an amazing study psychologists Jesse Bering and Becky Parker had children aged three to nine play a forced-choice game in which they were told to select between two boxes. In this design one box was the correct choice, and the other was the wrong choice, but this fifty-fifty chance of success was boosted by some supernatural help. Half the children were told that they were going to be aided by Princess Alice, an invisible princess who would be “telling them, somehow, when they chose the wrong box.” The other children did not receive this notice.

			As the children reached to select a box, a sudden, spooky event would occur, like a light switching on and off or a picture falling off a wall and clattering to the ground. Researchers then recorded whether or not the children switched the box they had selected—a sign that they had heard Princess Alice’s message and were acting accordingly. They found that many kids changed their selection, making the connection between the unexpected event and Princess Alice.38 This study suggests that our attention to the agency of supernatural entities emerges relatively early in life and is likely a prerequisite to acquiring full-fledged religious belief.



					 						Figure 46: Supernatural Communication

						A child receives Princess Alice’s message and changes his choice.



				 			 			Supernatural agents not only give you confidence about picking boxes, jobs, and spouses but also provide meaning to the world more generally. Consider this deep and eternal question: what is the purpose of a can opener? It’s not a trick question. Can openers are for opening cans. Consider a similar question: what is the purpose of a rock? This question has no clear answer. You might answer “nothing” or “whatever you use it for.” The purpose of a rock might be to hold open a door, to make a splash in a river, to bring down Goliath, or, in a pinch, to open a can.

			The difference between can openers and rocks is that, unlike a rock, someone made a can opener, and they had a specific goal in mind when they did so.* Rocks aren’t made to do something; they just are. Of course, that’s what most adults think, but kids are a different story. In one study led by developmental psychologist Deborah Kelemen, seven-year-old kids and adults were asked why one particular rock was pointy. Adults mentioned erosion or chance, but kids mentioned a purpose. One suggested that it was pointy so that animals could scratch themselves on it, and another suggested that the point was designed to prevent animals from sitting on it. Just as we are natural-born mind perceivers, it appears that we are natural-born purpose perceivers39—and these may be the same thing.

			People may not often think about the purpose of rocks, but they often think about the deeper meaning of their lives. People want to know what they are meant—or designed—to do. Being designed to do something requires a designer, a mind that has a plan about your life. This mind is typically held to be God. In his book The Purpose Driven Life Christian pastor Rick Warren provides five purposes to the big question “What on Earth am I here for?” all of which involve serving God.

			The mind of God is seen as designing not only individual lives but also recently creating the Earth. Although the idea is considered absurd in scientific circles, 46 percent of Americans endorse creationism, believing that the Earth was created only a few thousand years ago, basically as is.40 This account has difficulty explaining the fossil record and the relatively high levels of argon in rocks of the Canadian shield* but does seem much more intuitive than how the Earth actually formed. For many creationists, the sticking point with an old-Earth theory appears to be evolution, which suggests that not only sharks, cacti, and butterflies evolved but also humans. As one nineteenth-century antievolution tract wrote,


If a man prefers to look for his kindred in the zoological gardens, it is no concern of mine; if he wants to believe that the founder of his family was an ape, a gorilla, a mud-turtle, or a moner, he may do so; but when he insists that I shall trace my lineage in that direction, I say No Sir! . . . I prefer that my genealogical table shall end as it now does, with “Cainan, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.”41

			There are many reasons that people oppose the idea of human evolution, and our lab has explored one that has to do with mind perception. Recall from chapter 8 on the dead the idea of “conservation of mind,” in which people found it difficult to imagine a mind being created or destroyed. Conservation of mind means that it is difficult to imagine the powerful human mind coalescing out of a set of intrinsically mindless processes. The mutation and recombination of genes is a process with no more mind than a rainstorm, and yet science suggests that it is responsible for our entire mind, both our agency and our experience. To explore people’s resistance to the idea of mind evolving, we and Chelsea Schein ran a pilot study in which people rated the likelihood that various physical and mental human traits evolved.

			As predicted, people were happy to describe physical processes (e.g., having an immune system) as the result of evolution, but they were far less comfortable with ascribing mental processes to evolution—especially love. If you believe in God, however, there is no amazing creation of mind ex nihilo, as He can merely pass on a small piece of His own mind to others, like lighting a torch from an eternal central flame. This belief is reenacted symbolically in Catholic baptism, when infant children are presented with a candle lit from the flame of the Paschal candle, representing the light of Christ now burning in the newly baptized child.

			As important as God is in the beginning of life, He is even more important at the end of life. God’s plan is often invoked when car accidents kill people in their prime, when children are diagnosed with terminal cancer, and when natural disasters destroy entire villages of families. Why does God hold such an important role in situations of suffering? As we discussed earlier, people dislike randomness and lack of purpose, and believing in God can give a sense of control. However, there is another powerful reason why times of intense suffering lead people to see God: dyadic completion.

			As we have seen many times throughout this book, our cognitive template of good and evil includes two minds, a moral agent and a moral patient. This template leads people to infer the presence of victims when they observe an isolated moral agent, such as when those who see homosexuality as immoral point to the irreparable damage it causes to children (patientic dyadic completion). This dyadic template also leads people to infer the presence of agents when they observe an isolated moral patient, such as when environmental destruction by corporations is seen as intentional. This agentic dyadic completion happens all the time. When children become obese through so many Big Macs, parents search for an intentional agent to blame (not themselves, of course) and sue McDonald’s. Yet there is often suffering so grand that even McDonald’s can’t take the blame. When there is massive suffering in the world, people don’t just ask, “Why?” Instead they drop to their knees, look skyward, and shout “Why, God!?”

			Anecdotal evidence for God’s role in suffering comes after every major natural disaster. After the 2004 tsunami that killed more than 280,000 in Thailand, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and India, Saudi cleric Muhammad Al-Munajjid said it was vengeance for the sinful lifestyle of tourists at coastal resorts, “who used to sprawl all over the beaches and in pubs overflowing with wine.”42 After Hurricane Katrina, New Orleans mayor Ray Nagin also invoked God’s wrath, and Pat Robertson suggested that New Orleans was being punished for America’s abortion policy.43

			Going beyond these anecdotes, we wanted to test dyadic completion on a national scale, so we examined whether suffering across the United States predicted religious belief. We obtained the average level of religious belief in each state by using the percentage of people who reported that “they strongly believe in God” in a recent public opinion survey. Next we obtained the average level of suffering in each state by mathematically reversing the score given to each state by the United Health Foundation.44 This “suffering score” reflects the prevalence of negative health outcomes in a state, such as obesity, diabetes, and infectious disease. Correlating suffering with religious belief yields a value of 0.69, which is extremely high for something as idiosyncratic as religious belief. This link is even higher if you take out the two outlier states—Utah and Nevada. Utah is where people are generally happy and religious (i.e., Mormons), and Nevada is where people are generally miserable and have forsaken God (i.e., gamblers and other sinners).



					 						Figure 47: Scatterplot of U.S. States—Mean Belief in God by Suffering Index.

						K. GRAY AND D. M. WEGNER, “BLAMING GOD FOR OUR PAIN: HUMAN SUFFERING AND THE DIVINE MIND,” PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 14 (2010): 7–16.



				 			 			We replicated the link between perceived suffering and religious belief in another study in which people read fictional scenarios about the Millers, a family who decide to hike down to a canyon floor for a weekend picnic. In the story the Millers are eating their lunch when the water level of the canyon rises suddenly and they all either die (in one version) or escape to the parking lot to finish their soggy sandwiches (in another version). We also manipulated whether there was a clear human agent behind the flood, saying either it was caused by a malevolent damn worker upstream of the canyon (in one version) or for some unknown reason (in another version). We then asked how much the events of the story were part of “God’s plan.” Just as we predicted, people saw God’s handiwork only in one specific situation—when the cause of the flood was unknown and the Millers all died. When the family died, people needed to find an agent to blame for their suffering but looked to God only when there wasn’t an easy human agent to blame. In other words, people saw God in the “moral gaps” when blame was otherwise unaccounted.

			People often see God in goodness as well, such as when they narrowly miss being in a car accident, when their team wins the Super Bowl, when they find a prime parking spot during Christmas shopping season, or when, in 2010, thirty-three trapped Chilean miners were rescued after spending sixty-nine days buried far underground. However, hundreds of studies find that negative information has much more psychological power than positive information.45 You may thank God briefly at Thanksgiving dinner, but after being diagnosed with cancer, you may think about Him and His plan almost every day. Of course, God is not the only powerful agent that we blame for suffering, and studies reveal that we often look to the government or—as we saw in chapter 7 on groups—conspiracy theories to make sense of misery.46

			Although there are many agents in the mind club, God is unparalleled in His level of agency. His power, knowledge, and preoccupation with morality make Him the ultimate moral agent. As predicted by moral typecasting—the separation between moral agents and moral patients—His extreme moral agency makes Him seem invulnerable to suffering. God is seen as capable of doing, acting, planning, and thinking but not feeling many of the bodily sensations and emotions that characterize humans. God does not get embarrassed or afraid or hungry, and it would be gauche to think of him needing to go to the bathroom. He is a thinking doer and not a vulnerable feeler.

			God’s all-agency mind may remind you of the corporations we explored in chapter 7 on groups, and this parallel is even stronger when you consider Google. The mind survey indicated that God and Google occupied the same place on the mind map, and there is already an official “Church of Google,”* which sees the awesome power of Google as (at least somewhat) divine. The church offers commandments, which, like the real commandments, offer both general moral principles such as “Thou shalt not plagiarise or take undue credit for other’s work” and Google-specific guidelines such as “Thou shalt have no other Search Engine before me, neither Yahoo nor Lycos, AltaVista nor Metacrawler. Thou shalt worship only me, and come to Google only for answers.” It also lists a number of Google prayers, such as this adaptation of Proverbs 3:5–6 by one congregant:


Trust in the GOOGLE with all your heart

			and lean not on your own understanding;

			in all your ways acknowledge Her,

			and She will direct your paths.47

			If you believe in the real God, you may scoff at these “prayers” to Google, but the breadth of knowledge housed within the mind of Google is all but incomprehensible, just like the mind of God.

			Despite being incomprehensible, God’s mind is, conveniently, very humanlike. God supposedly created us in His image, but how are we to know that we aren’t just creating Him in our image? In one classic study that tested mind perception and God, participants read a story about God doing various tasks, such as helping people. This story was constructed to be consistent with what is called a “theologically correct view of God,” such that God could have been in two places at once (omnipresence) or could have heard a conversation over very loud noises (omniscience). Although participants shared this theologically correct view, explicitly ascribing to Him all the appropriate “omnis,” a different pattern emerged when they informally recalled the stories. Participants spoke of God as having to stop one thing before starting another (violating omnipresence) and of not being able to see something when it was behind a barrier (violating omniscience). In other words, they saw God as an especially powerful person and not an incomprehensible deity.48

			This contradiction between the human (anthro) and divine (omni) elements of God—particularly in Jesus—has long been a point of contention in Christianity. How can something be both a mortal man and an immortal God? The whole point of being godly is to transcend humanity, whereas the whole point of being human is to have flaws and limitations. Some early Christians found this “omni-anthro paradox” too hard to take, but this duality may in fact have helped Christianity to spread around the world, as it may be just counterintuitive enough to stick in people’s minds. Something fully godlike or fully human may be easily forgotten, but something that is both may capture attention in a powerful way.

			An anthropomorphic God not only sticks in our thoughts but is simply easier to think of as someone like us. Western religious images portray Jesus as a white European, despite the fact that a Middle Eastern Jew would look quite different. In Africa Jesus can appear as a black man; in South America, as a Hispanic man. Even more than the physical image of God, we project our individual beliefs onto Him. Ever wonder why people who condemn homosexuality also believe that “God hates fags,”49 whereas those who think homosexuality is merely a matter of attraction also believe that God loves us all?50 God seems to share our exact moral belief, even when it contradicts someone else’s God-endorsed moral belief.

			The root of this phenomenon is known as “the false consensus effect.” In almost everything we overestimate the percentage of others who share our beliefs.51 How many people like Taylor Swift or foie gras or light bondage in the bedroom? Studies suggest that we answer this question by first anchoring on whether we like these things, then adjusting slightly—but always insufficiently. As we discussed earlier, in chapter 4 on patients, we use simulation to understand the minds of others, and God’s mind is no different. In fact, this bias is even stronger when estimating the beliefs of God, as a study led by Nick Epley found.52

			Epley had participants estimate the opinions of the general public and, predictably, participants believed that their own beliefs were more common than they actually were. If a participant supported the legalization of marijuana, they overestimated the percentage of the public that supported legalization. Participants were then asked to estimate God’s beliefs. As it turned out, participants who thought marijuana should be legalized also believed that the creator was overwhelmingly in favor of lighting up a doobie. Why? Perhaps because we know that although others may be stupid and not share our love of Taylor Swift, God is infallible, so of course He agrees with us.

			People see God not only as an all-access agent who passes moral judgment and accounts for suffering but also as a trusted confidant. Even when your friends don’t want to hear about your problems, your spouse pretends to be sleeping, and the family dog plays dead, God is there to listen to you. One evangelical church called Vineyard encourages its members to have a very personal relationship with God. As explored by anthropologist T. M. Luhrmann in her book When God Talks Back, congregants are encouraged to schedule time to speak with Jesus.

			Because God talks to people through their thoughts, such conversations blur the line between their own minds and God’s, and it takes practice to recognize which of their thoughts have divine provenance. This discernment between mundane and divine thoughts also appears to require social consensus, as congregants frequently relay a number of potentially godly thoughts to other members, who then identify which ones seem reasonably divine. For example, thoughts that are self-centered (e.g., God says to buy a new stereo) are often seen as coming from the self, whereas thoughts of compassion (e.g., God says to volunteer at the soup kitchen) are collectively acknowledged as godly.

			Once people are able to discern their divinely inspired thoughts, they are encouraged to have even more regular conversations with Him. Vineyard women often speak of setting aside a night to have a “date” with Jesus, sometimes setting their dinner table for two: themselves and Him. During these dates people are encouraged to speak to God as if he were actually sitting there, directing his full attention and limitless love to them. As one congregant told Luhrmann about the Bible, “It’s a love story, and it’s written for me.” This kind of relationship would seem incredible to medieval believers, who saw God as a cold, inscrutable, and distant judge, and likely reflects changing norms regarding not only God but also our parents.

			Centuries ago, parents also had a very different role in the lives of children. In ancient Rome fathers were rulers of their families but had no obligation to treat their spouses and offspring kindly. They had the option of abandoning any child at birth and could choose to sell an unwanted son or daughter into slavery. They even possessed the right to kill their children, if they so chose.53 Today murdering a child is widely frowned upon, and modern fathers face expectations of compassion, caretaking, and guidance—just like God. Why would our relationship with God hew so closely to those with our parents?

			Freud didn’t get a lot right, but he was right about some of our early-childhood experiences shaping our future lives when it comes to relationships. For example, research finds that many people expect their partners to be like their parents.54 If your parents were cold and distant, or warm and responsive, you expect your romantic partners to be the same way. Research finds that the same pattern applies to God, such that people respond to God in the same way they respond to their parents.55 Those with secure emotional bonds to their parents have a similar comfortable, close relationship with God. In contrast, those insecurely attached to their parents worry about what God might think of them and about being abandoned.56

			If you’ve read this far, you should understand at least one thing by now, and that is that minds—including God’s—are a matter of perception. The religious may see the will of God on a daily basis while the atheist sees nothing but randomness. But what about those who experience God directly, not in a symbolic way but via an intense, personal vision of God, in the style of Moses, Joseph Smith, or Muhammad? One scientist, Michael Persinger, believes that he can elicit this religious experience in anyone, even the staunchest of disbelievers. Persinger helped develop the “God helmet,” a device that uses a weak electric current to stimulate a small area of the temporal lobe.

			Participants who wear this special helmet are placed in a completely darkened room with zero stimulation. They are seated comfortably in a large armchair and covered with a blanket. The current is turned on, and they spend the next hour alone in complete darkness—but are they really alone? Participants soon report strange sensations, such as spirits in the room, rising out of their bodies, and an overwhelming feeling of a presence. Sometimes they experience God. As Persinger points out, if you know that you’re in a lab, this may be simply a fun adventure in tricking the brain, but imagine the consequences if someone were to have the same experience in a mosque, in a synagogue, in a church, or even home alone at night.57 Such an experience could be a life-changing revelation for a believer or even cause a skeptic to rethink his views.

			The God helmet suggests that some of the deepest and most transformative religious experiences could stem from the simple overstimulation of neurons. However, many scientifically sophisticated believers suggest that it cannot be any other way. God—through evolution—gave us the kind of brain that can know Him, not through something magical but through the same neural processes by which we know other truths in the world, such as the love of our children and the freshness of the air after a thunderstorm.

			Just because researchers can induce religious experiences, they assert, doesn’t mean that the same experiences in a church aren’t real connections to God. As an analogy, it is possible to open up your car’s dash and move the speedometer with your finger, so that it looks like you are going eighty miles per hour when you are actually parked. However, this doesn’t mean that the speedometer is always wrong—sometimes when it reads eighty miles per hour, you are whooshing down a highway with nothing but the open sky before you. And sometimes when you get an exhilarating rush of the divine, it could also be an accurate readout of the spiritual world moving beneath your feet.

			Nevertheless, knowing how the brain constructs religion takes at least some of the mystery out of things, which is why psychologists, out of all scientists, are the least likely to believe in God. In a recent study it was revealed that 50 percent of psychology professors are staunch atheists, with only 13 percent affirming a strong belief in God.58 Some believe that psychology is out of its depth in studying these religious experiences, or even that these questions are generally off-limits to science. The biologist Stephen Jay Gould believed that science and religion have “non-overlapping magisterias”—distinct and circumscribed domains of knowledge.59 He thought that science could explain how to make better batteries, how black holes work, and how to cure polio, but that only religion could explain questions like morality and the meaning of life. But as we have seen again and again, psychology can explain at least how people understand these deep topics. In other words, psychology suggests that the domains of science and religion are actually inextricably intertwined.

			Out of all the minds we’ve covered, questions about God are possibly the most divisive. More blood has been spilled about the nature of God’s mind than any other, and debates about whether it exists at all have polarized national discussions. God’s mind is ascribed qualities such as immortality, omnipotence, and omniscience—but is also seen as fundamentally human—making it a very interesting case study in mind perception. In truth, God is actually only the second-most interesting of all minds. The most interesting mind is obvious; nothing is more interesting to people than themselves. In the last chapter we will explore the mind of the self.





Chapter 10


		 			THE SELF





Kenneth Parks seems to be an unremarkable man. He is middle-aged, lives in Toronto, Canada, and once ran for school trustee, attempting to help shape the system that taught five of his children. Unfortunately for Parks, he lost the trustee election because of an event that happened decades ago. When he was twenty-three and living with his new wife and their five-month-old daughter, Parks started having sleep problems. Of course, anyone with a new baby has difficulty sleeping, but these seemed to go deeper, stemming perhaps from his financial troubles. Parks had a gambling problem that had cost him much of his family savings and even his job, but despite these difficulties he still maintained a good relationship with his wife and his in-laws. Indeed, his mother-in-law, Barbara, took a special shine to her son-in-law, calling him her “gentle giant.” It is Parks’s close relationship with Barbara that makes his actions on the night of May 23, 1987, seem so unbelievable.

			On that night Parks fell asleep in front of the TV and, while still asleep, got up and drove the two dozen kilometers to his in-laws’ house. Using the key they had given him, he entered the house and made his way up to their bedroom while they slept. He was holding a tire iron. Parks first walked over to Barbara and bludgeoned her to death before turning his attention to his father-in-law, Dennis, whom he choked and left for dead. Parks then—still asleep and now covered in blood—drove directly to the nearest police station and confessed, saying, “I think I just killed two people.”

			It is clear that Parks physically killed his mother-in-law (Dennis miraculously survived), but was he guilty? Guilt in the eyes of the law requires both actus reus (guilty action) and mens rea (guilty mind), and although his body bludgeoned Barbara, did his mind? Parks claims that the answer is no, maintaining that he was unaware of these unlawful acts because he was sleepwalking. Your likely reaction is just the opposite: “Yes! He is guilty!” How could someone possibly sleep through a twenty-minute drive and a subsequent murder?

			The police thought they had an open-and-shut case of financially motivated murder, but expert witnesses testified otherwise. After measuring Parks’s sleeping brain activity with EEG, five sleep specialists—all of whom had also approached the case with extreme skepticism—confirmed Parks’s account. They testified that Parks could indeed have been asleep through the entire grisly murder. The judge agreed. Parks was found not guilty and walked out of the courtroom a free man, on the condition that he take a special regime of sleep medication. Since that tragic day in May, Parks has never so much as raised a finger against anyone, suggesting that his murdered mother-in-law might have been right—perhaps Parks really was a “gentle giant.”

			The story of Kenneth Parks probably makes you uneasy. It’s possible that a man escaped justice, which stymies the process of dyadic completion—the compulsion to blame suffering on an intentional agent. Also unnerving is the possibility of sleepwalking murderers, because you never know when your son-in-law or wife or neighbor could murder you. But perhaps most unsettling is the possibility that you might be like Parks.

			What would happen if you suddenly woke up and found yourself covered in a loved one’s blood? It would be tragic enough to lose a family member, never mind spending your life in prison for a crime for which you had neither motivation nor memory. You might think that this could never happen to you, but don’t be too smug, as there are many who, like Parks, do heinous deeds while asleep.1 Deep down in your unconscious, you too could be a murderer. You think not? But how well do you know your own mind?

			Out of all the minds in the world, our own seems special. It’s the only mind that unambiguously belongs in the mind club. We are certain that we possess both agency and experience because we experience our minds from the inside. Our dualistic friend seventeenth-century philosopher René Descartes imagined the possibility of an omnipotent demon bent on deceiving him. This demon could give him visual, auditory, and even tactile hallucinations and make the world appear very different from how it was in reality. In the grip of such a demon, Descartes wondered what—if anything—he could know about the world with certainty.2 After much thought, he finally concluded that the only thing that was unquestionably true was that he existed, because he was thinking. “Je pense, donc je suis,” he affirmed, or, in English, “I think, therefore I am.”*3 In other words, the only thing any of us can be sure about is our own minds.

			Although we can be certain of the existence of our own mind, it is unclear how well we understand it. People are also reasonably certain of the existence of the sun, but it was only relatively recently that it came to be understood to be a giant ball of hydrogen powered by nuclear fusion millions of miles away through the void of space. For millennia people believed the sun to be a mystical deity (Ra in Egypt, Helios in Greece, and Surya in Hinduism) and dedicated an entire day of the week to this god: Sunday.4 It seems incredible that something so familiar and important could be misunderstood for so long—and perhaps it is the same with our minds. Perhaps your understanding of your thoughts and feelings is like the Egyptians’ understanding of the sun.

			You may bristle at this analogy, because there is one big difference between the sun and our minds: we are minds and not suns. If we all were (conscious) suns, we would presumably know about the importance of nuclear fusion. As we are minds, we should presumably know instead about our minds’ inner workings. What’s more, our own minds also seem relatively easy to learn about. To understand nuclear fusion, you need things like telescopes or particle accelerators, but to understand your thoughts and feelings, you need only a quiet moment and the capacity for introspection. Like centuries of philosophers, you can simply sit in an armchair and observe what it’s like to have sensations, beliefs, and desires.

			The sticking point, however, is whether we truly have the capacity for introspection. Part of the inspiration behind the science of psychology is the realization that our knowledge of the world may be biased, and this knowledge may be most distorted when it concerns the self. As proof, simply ask ten people whether they are above average in driving skill. The vast majority of people will say that they are indeed above average in looks,5 and also in driving skill,6 intelligence,7 friendliness, and athletic ability.8 Statistically speaking, this is impossible, as fully half the people in the world are below average in any ability.* If you want an accurate answer about someone’s abilities, that person is actually the worst person to ask. Instead you should ask their friends or acquaintances, who are less motivated to exaggerate.9

			It is especially difficult—or even impossible—to perceive how your mind works. As an example, please solve this math equation: 5 × 8 = ? If you answered 40, congratulations—but the real question is how you figured it out. It is unlikely that you got five apples and then counted them eight times over. Instead you likely accessed some mathematical machinery that churned unconsciously and then spit out an answer into your conscious mind. At no point did you ever observe how this was working.

			For an even simpler example of the inaccessibility of your mental mechanisms, take a look at the sky. How do you see it as blue? There is no real color out there but instead a specific wavelength of light that our cones, retinas, and visual cortex tag as “blue.” You have no idea how that happens and could not intervene even if you wanted to. You cannot by force of will make the sky look red. And while we’re talking about the force of will—what is the will, really? How is it that your body translates thoughts (e.g., “I should get out of bed”) to actions (e.g., getting out of bed)?10 These questions are enough to make anyone dizzy.

			In the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, the ancient Greeks inscribed the motto “γνω˜θι σεαυτόν,” telling people, “Know thyself,” perhaps because knowing oneself is a fundamental step to understanding others. As other minds are a matter of perception, it is important to understand the person doing the perceiving—you. When you observe the world, are you clear-eyed and farsighted, or is the world bent through the thick prescription lenses of self-deception?

			Instead of asking about the agency and experience of other minds, this chapter investigates how we know our own agency and experience. We will see how the most basic assumptions about our minds, such as free will or the existence of the self, may be illusory. We have been judging whether other cryptominds belong in the mind club, but do you really belong with all the other minds? Not only are you unaware of the deepest truths about yourself, but you likely can’t even explain why you buy some consumer goods instead of others. Take panty hose, for example.

			In 1977 famed psychologists Richard Nisbett and Tim Wilson presented female participants with four pairs of panty hose and asked them to pick the one they liked most. After carefully evaluating each pair, the women typically chose the one on the right, and when asked why, they would often reference the silkiness or smoothness or durability of that specific pair. The only hitch was that each pair was identical, with the exact same silkiness, smoothness, and durability. Why did they choose the pair on the right? Likely because most people are right-handed and it’s convenient to reach to the right. Importantly, when they were asked if the order of the pantyhose might have influenced their decision, participants insisted that such a small detail could hardly have been an influence, firmly believing in their fallacious reasoning.11

			This lack of self-insight can sometimes become apparent in the dating lives of friends. Among a string of boyfriends, someone might explain that she loved number one because he was handsome and well dressed, number two because he was kind and had warm eyes, and number three because he was extraverted and funny. However, if you ran a statistical analysis, you might find that the majority of the variance is accounted for by income (she likes rich men). If you told her this, she might completely disavow your utilitarian account and argue that money doesn’t matter to her. It may be true that she doesn’t think money matters, but kisses speak louder than words.

			Consider online dating, where people search for that quirky special someone who completes them. How do people decide whom to message? Do they look at their witty profiles? Their astrological signs? Online daters may convince themselves that these things matter, but most of the variance is accounted for by whether women are young, attractive, and extroverted and whether men are tall, muscular, and wealthy.12 We invent the other reasons to feel less shallow.

			A compelling demonstration of our lack of self-insight comes from Swedish researchers Lars Hall and Petter Johansson, who repeatedly presented participants with two pictures, each of a different woman. In each trial participants would select the woman they found more attractive, and then were asked to explain their choice: Why was she prettier? Explanations would typically include “She’s radiant” or “A nice shape of the face” or “She looks very hot!” Nothing remarkable so far, but in one key trial, the experimenter would perform a small sleight of hand and switch the pictures after participants made their selection.

			In other words, in one trial, participants were asked to explain why they had selected the person they hadn’t selected. For example, if you were presented with Kate Moss and Kate Upton (two very different models) and selected Upton, the experimenter would then show you Moss and ask why you chose her (even though you didn’t). Despite the fact that people had selected the other model just seconds ago, more than 70 percent of them didn’t notice the switch. Even more striking, people were more than happy to provide reasons for why they preferred the face that they didn’t prefer, commenting again on facial structure, stunning smiles, and twinkling eyes.13



					 						Figure 48: Choice Blindness

						Participants demonstrate choice blindness when they describe why they liked the face they didn’t actually prefer.

						P. JOHANSSON, L. HALL, B. TÄRNING, S. SIKSTRÖM, AND N. CHATER, “CHOICE BLINDNESS AND PREFERENCE CHANGE: YOU WILL LIKE THIS PAPER BETTER IF YOU (BELIEVE YOU) CHOSE TO READ IT,” JOURNAL OF BEHAVIORAL DECISION MAKING 27 (2014): 281–89.



				 			 			More than the panty hose study, this study on “choice blindness” seriously undermines the accuracy of self-knowledge. With the panty hose, people could have actually thought that the pair on the right was silkier and chosen it because of this perception. This would suggest that people are wrong about some unimportant perceptions about the world (e.g., silkiness) but not about themselves. On the other hand, the picture study suggests that people are wrong about themselves because they don’t even realize their own (extremely recent) choices.

			You could argue that judgments of attractiveness are special, but Hall and Johansson have also replicated this study with taste. In a supermarket they approached shoppers for a taste test between two jams and asked them to indicate their preference. Participants easily chose a preference between the two, such as cinnamon-apple over grapefruit, and the experimenter would record their preference. Participants were then asked to taste their favorite jam again and describe why they liked it. As in the picture study, the experimenters swapped the jams, so the fan of cinnamon-apple tasted grapefruit instead. Even with a dramatic difference in flavor profiles, fewer than 30 percent of participants detected the switch; the rest happily told the researchers about their love of citrus-flavored sweets.

			Rather than giving true explanations for their behavior or choices, it seems that people simply provide after-the-fact justifications, just as you might when watching someone else’s behavior. Neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga has suggested that our conscious self is just an “interpreter” that spins plausible stories for our behavior after the fact.14 Many times these stories are right. The reason we ordered the chocolate cake instead of the fruit flan is because we love chocolate. But that’s not a special reason that only you can know. A stranger can infer the exact same reason when observing your behavior, suggesting that we may know little more about ourselves than an educated outsider. This logic turns mind perception on its head. We’ve always discussed how other minds are ultimately inaccessible and a matter of perception, but our own minds may be almost as inaccessible and perceived.

			What is most striking about our lack of self-insight is not necessarily that we make up explanations but our total confidence in their correctness. We seldom pause to consider that we might be mistaken about our reasons for acting—or anything else. Instead we consistently try to confirm what (we think) we already know, a tendency called the confirmation bias. More technically, the confirmation bias is the systematic distortion in the search, interpretation, and recall of information in order to support preexisting theories15—and there are zillions of examples.16 You are falling prey to confirmation bias when you selectively recount the driving accidents of Asian Americans (theory: Asian people are bad drivers)17 or selectively seek out stories of violence perpetrated by African Americans (theory: black people are violent)18 or selectively find anecdotes in which handguns shoot burglars rather than schoolchildren (theory: handguns save lives).19

			We can do a remarkably effective example of the confirmation bias right here, between us. Take this sequence of three numbers: 2, 4, 8. Your job is to come up with the rule that governs the number progression. Your first guess is likely that we multiply the previous number by two (i.e., xn = 2 × xn-1), making the next number 16. Nope. Perhaps the trick is to add an extra 2 in each step, giving us the next number of 14 (i.e., 2 + 2 = 4 + 4 = 8, 8 + 6 = 14). Nope. Or maybe there is some mysterious link to the Fibonacci sequence? Nope. The rule is simple: each number has to be bigger than the last one.

			You might now complain that all your other suggestions also fit this pattern, but these other suggestions were too specific and missed the broader point. Theories like xn = 2 × xn-1 are the equivalent of saying that only Asian people are bad drivers when in fact everyone is a bad driver. The reason that people almost always miss this rule is that they ask questions trying to confirm their hypotheses rather than disconfirm them. People always ask, “Is the next number 16?” and never ask, “Is the next number –100?”

			The confirmation bias both consistently leads us astray and imbues us with confidence, undermining the process of discovery. This is why scientists typically try to disconfirm their hypotheses, or at least the hypotheses of their rivals. This can lead them to be quite skeptical of the established wisdom of anything, whether it involves the flatness of the Earth (actually round!), the unimportance of sanitation with respect to disease (cholera is actually caused by poop!), or the firmness of matter (actually mostly empty space!). Social psychology really began as a skeptical reaction to intuitive accounts of human behavior, with the most classic example being a study first reported in 1963 by Stanley Milgram.

			In the aftermath of the World War II, people all over the world grappled with how average Germans could have been complicit—or worse—in the wholesale slaughter of innocent Jews. The prevailing theory at the time was that Germans were an especially tractable people, but Milgram had other ideas. He believed that even God-fearing Americans could be persuaded to kill others through only polite insistence, and he designed a paradigm to test this hypothesis. In this famous paradigm participants were asked to teach another person a list of words and—in order to help them learn—to shock the “learner” for every mistake. On each trial the shock level increased; Milgram wanted to know how many everyday Americans would continue with the experiment all the way to the end, administering the maximum—and ostensibly lethal—voltage of 450 volts.

			Most experts believed that only 1 percent to 4 percent of people would go all the way (i.e., a few sadists), but as you may already know, 65 percent of people obeyed to the deadly end. Of course, participants weren’t happy about it. Writes Milgram, “At one point, [the participant] pushed his fist into his forehead and muttered: ‘Oh God, let’s stop it.’ And yet he continued to respond to every word of the experiment and obeyed to the end.”20 Neither participants nor observers had imagined the scale of this obedience to authority. This study powerfully demonstrates that we too can do terrible things: the path of least resistance sinks us imperceptibly into moral turpitude.

			Of course, people typically chafe at this “social psychological” explanation, believing that there is one fundamental, metaphysical truth that does give us ultimate choice over our moral actions—the existence of free will. Perhaps because of the Christian roots of Western society, we feel that there is a human faculty that allows True Choice—unfettered by situations and others—that can justify an eternity in heaven or hell. Our entire legal system is predicated on the idea that we are the ultimate deciders of our own actions. How can we sentence someone to death if they did not ultimately deserve it? How can we keep someone in the soul-crushing isolation of solitary confinement if they didn’t freely choose their acts?

			This sense of ultimate free will accords not only with the legal system but also with our experiences. We feel like we choose our college, our spouse, and our jobs, and we feel like we freely select which fridge, car, and toothbrush to buy. Even more fundamentally, we seem to choose to move our hands and feet, turn our heads, stretch our backs, and move our mouths to talk. This basic kind of free will may seem obviously true, but scientists doubt its existence, thanks to the work of Benjamin Libet.

			Libet’s study was simple from the perspective of participants, who watched a quickly rotating clock (imagine a second hand moving at triple speed) and lifted their finger whenever they got the conscious urge. While participants flexed their free will with this simple motor movement, they also mentally noted the position of the clock. Importantly, this wasn’t the time at which the participants actually moved their finger but instead the time that they chose to move. We’ll call this time “W” for “will.”

			Libet also collected EEG data from electrodes on each participant’s scalp, particularly from the supplementary motor cortex, a small strip of brain near the crown of the head. This brain region is integral to movement. It begins the process of movement (by releasing electrical energy), which triggers other brain regions (the motor cortex), which in turn triggers the nerves that cause the actual muscle movement. We’ll label the activation of the supplementary motor cortex time “B” for “brain.” Finally, Libet measured the time at which the finger moved—“M” for “movement.”

			We now have three times that we are concerned about: W, the time of will; B, the time of brain activation; and M, the time of movement. Through the hundreds of trials Libet could accurately determine the order of these events and, by doing so, test the concept of free will. Integral to the study is a single undisputable logical fact: causes must come before events. If there is free will, then time W (the conscious decision to move) must come before time B (when the brain starts preparing to move your finger).

			Unfortunately for ultimate human freedom, W most definitely follows B: the conscious decision to move comes 350 milliseconds after the supplementary motor area starts firing. In plain language, Libet revealed that you decide to move your finger only after your brain has already started moving it.21 As brain activation precedes your decision to move, it’s not really a decision at all. Instead, it’s like “choosing” to go skydiving after someone has already thrown you out of a plane. In the plainest language possible, Libet revealed that free will is an illusion.



					 						Figure 49: Two Possibilities for the Timing 0f Movement

						Free will suggests that conscious choice precedes brain activation, but it instead follows it.



				 			 			When this information is revealed, people have the experience of falling through darkness, grasping for any possible free-will handhold. Maybe the equipment was faulty? No, people have replicated this study many times with different equipment. Maybe there was a lag time before people noticed the stopwatch? No, the experimenters calculated and compensated for potential lag for each individual participant. Maybe supplementary motor cortex activity was actually the brain activity of free will? But this suggests that it is your brain that has free will, and it just tells your conscious self afterward. When Libet’s article was first published in 1985, the journal invited commentaries from twenty-six scientists, who mostly tried to debunk the study. Unfortunately, none of their criticisms stuck and even thirty years later we are left with the sobering finding: free will is a feeling we get only after our unconscious brain has already decided our movements.

			In another demonstration of the illusory nature of free will, researchers used a procedure called transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), which involves placing giant doughnut-shaped electromagnets next to participants’ heads and then pulsing them on and off. Because magnetism interacts with electricity, and neurons run on electricity, these pulses can activate different brain regions. Researchers told participants to move either their left or their right hand while activating the participants’ motor cortex. Importantly, the choice of which hand to move was entirely up to the participants—but they nevertheless “freely chose” the hand corresponding to the nature of the TMS stimulation. Pulsing a clockwise current through the magnets made participants choose to move their right hand, and pulsing a counterclockwise current made participants choose to move their left hand.22 Strikingly, despite being marionettes of the magnet-wielding researchers, these participants still felt completely free when selecting which hand to move.

			These two studies converge on the idea that every movement and decision you make arises not from some independent source of free will but from the roiling, preconscious electrical activity of the brain. This does not sit well with many people, including Benjamin Libet. Realizing the soul-destroying conclusions of his original study, he redirected his career to disprove himself and save ultimate human freedom. After a number of studies, Libet believed that he had succeeded, having discovered that although we lack free will, we have free won’t. He claimed that the small amount of time (one hundred to two hundred milliseconds) between the initial activation of the supplementary motor cortex (time B) and the actual movement (time M) was enough for the conscious mind to intervene and arrest the movement. Essentially, he argued for a conscious executive veto power. Unfortunately, studies show that free won’t is also preceded by unconscious neural activity.23 It is your brain—not conscious “you”—that decides to move your finger, and it is your brain—not conscious “you”—that also decides to stop moving your finger.

			These results caused much hand-wringing among scientists, theologians, and legal scholars, but one philosopher was unfazed. In a book titled Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting, Daniel Dennett argues that the conclusions aren’t so dire.24 He asks us to imagine what kind of free will we really want. Do we want a free will that is totally unconnected to any previous behaviors or events in the world, like a completely random quantum coin flip? Unlikely. Instead, we all want a free will that makes the best kind of decisions for us, given our desires, intentions, and past experiences. It generally seems that we have this kind of free will, even if it does come from unconscious brain processes: we choose cars, spouses, and jobs we generally like, and that’s better than choosing at random just to exert some metaphysical independence.

			Unfortunately, this kind of free will, while being functional for everyday life, may not be strong enough to support ultimate moral responsibility—the idea that people freely choose to do good and evil and therefore deserve harsh punishments for crimes (including death). Neuroscientists—who see firsthand how brains cause behavior—suggest that there is no such thing as just deserts.25 There are good reasons to punish others for wrongdoing, such as deterrence (making bad deeds costly)26 and separation (keeping the bad people out of society),27 but slaking our thirst for retribution is not one of them. The lack of free will suggests that heaven and hell are populated not by sinful souls but by people whose souls happened to have bad brains.

			Although it may undermine justifications for executions and cruel and unusual forms of punishment, it is not clear that we should broadcast the fact that humans lack “ultimate” free will. Imagine what might happen if you splashed the headline YOU ARE NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR YOUR ACTIONS across the New York Times. A study by psychologists Jonathan Schooler and Kathleen Vohs suggests that such a headline would likely cause an immediate crime spree and license people to succumb to their basest desires. In their study participants read an essay either affirming or denying free will; those who read arguments against free will were more likely to cheat on a math test and to claim a larger sum of money than they deserved.28 Free will may be an illusion, but it’s a useful one, because it makes people—or at least their brains—feel more accountable and act more prosocially.

			These findings raise a quandary for psychologists, who typically go into science for two broad reasons: (1) revealing the truth about human experience and (2) improving the human condition. In the case of free will, these aims are in direct contradiction, because revealing the truth leads to hopelessness and immorality. This dilemma is reminiscent of a scene from the movie The Matrix in which the protagonist is presented with a choice between two pills: a red pill revealing the cold, ugly truth of the world and a blue pill allowing the blissful ignorance of a beautiful illusion. Psychologists—and now you—are also faced with this choice. Do you tell your coworkers that they lack ultimate responsibility and risk having them eat your lunch from the fridge, or do you let them keep their erroneous belief that they are the ultimate authors of every decision?

			Not only is ultimate self-control an illusion, but everyday self-control—a facet of agency—also seems illusive. People want to believe that they can resist temptation, but high rates of obesity, alcoholism, and infidelity suggest otherwise. People chronically overestimate their discipline in staying on task and chronically underestimate (typically by half) how long they will take to finish work.29 If people underestimate their likelihood of shocking another person to death, perhaps it isn’t surprising that they also underestimate the duration (and budgets) of projects and how much chocolate they’ll eat.

			Of course, simply learning that we are bad at self-control doesn’t provide a clear way of improving it. Psychology is often relatively better at pointing out problems than at solving them and can sometimes seem like a reverse Midas touch, draining the color from everything. The magic of love? The mystery of God? The experience of free will? All tricks of the brain. However, self-control is one domain where psychology actually does offer some pretty good tips on how to increase agency. The general tip is to never rely on self-control.

			This answer may seem evasive, but it is consistent with the social-psychological concept that people are typically at the mercy of their environment, which influences them via cues they seldom detect. The best way to exert self-control is to never put yourself in situations where you have to exert it, and instead to focus on structuring your environment such that succumbing to temptation is impossible. For example, the best way to avoid eating fatty snacks at home is to never purchase them at the grocery store. No matter how strong your midnight cravings at home, you simply cannot yield. At the very least, you would have to expend extensive energy to drive to the all-night convenience store, during which time your cravings could subside.

			This is the principle behind computer programs such as StayFocused, which lock you out of Facebook and Reddit so you can get writing done. These programs work mainly in two ways. The first is to calculate—and draw your attention to—your time off task, because frittering away minutes on Tumblr is less likely when you are faced with how those minutes add up to hours. The second way is to provide strict limits on how long you can access those sites, by locking you out once you hit your self-imposed quota.

			These gimmicks are called “commitment devices” because they force your commitment to self-control. The drug Antabuse is a commitment device for alcoholism. Normally your body breaks down alcohol into acetaldehyde, which is then quickly converted into acetic acid. A hangover is essentially the effects of acetaldehyde in your system, and Antabuse works by blocking the conversation of acetaldehyde into harmless acetic acid. In other words, it loads your system up on acetaldehyde, giving you the world’s worst hangover, starting only five to ten minutes after your first drink. A less extreme commitment device is simply asking another person to help you exert self-control, for instance by taking your keys and not giving them back if you are drunk.

			Commitment devices are used to great effect in books and movies. In Fight Club the protagonist tells other members to castrate him if he ever disobeys the leader of the Fight Club. In Stephen King’s “Quitters, Inc.” a man’s desire to quit smoking leads him to the eponymous company, which claims a 98 percent success rate.30 The method is simple: the company spies on you around the clock, and if you sneak a cigarette, they abduct a family member and torture him or her. Even the 2 percent who fail the program also never smoke again, because after the tenth mistake, the company executes you.

			Beyond preemptive drugs, enforcer friends, or familial torture there is one especially powerful method to increase self-control: implementation intentions. They are surprisingly simple and effective. In the first test of their power, NYU psychologist Peter Gollwitzer recruited participants and assigned them to write and then mail an essay over Christmas break—a pretty onerous task for college students. Half the participants were simply reminded to make sure they wrote it, whereas the other half were asked to make a plan for when and where they were going to write it, such as “After opening gifts, I will go up to my desk, turn on my computer, and write the essay.” Gollwitzer found that the simple act of picking a time and place in advance increased the rate of essay completion from 32 percent to 71 percent.31 That’s a huge effect, especially given how minimal the intervention.

			More generally, implementation intentions take the form of “if/when X, then Y.” For the Christmas essay the X is “after opening gifts” and the Y “go upstairs and turn on the computer.” For weight loss the implementation intention might be “When I get hungry, I will open the fridge and take out vegetables, not cake.” For quitting smoking it might be “When I crave a cigarette, I will unwrap a piece of Nicorette and then do ten push-ups.” For quitting drinking it might be “If friends call inviting me out to the bar, I will suggest that we go to a movie.” Implementation intentions have been found to work in all these domains32 and others, including performing breast exams and reducing feelings of anxiety.33

			You may believe that implementation intentions are too simplistic to work, and you wouldn’t be alone. When he first heard of the Christmas essay study, our University of North Carolina colleague Paschal Sheeran was incredulous and reran the study, expecting to find nothing. Instead he replicated the effect and became an instant convert, and he now uses implementation intentions to increase patients’ adherence to cancer-fighting regimens. In one study Sheeran increased attendance at cervical cancer screenings from 69 percent to 92 percent with simple implementation intentions.34

			The reason implementation intentions work so well is because they export self-control, but this time to the unconscious self. As the Libet study revealed (and Freud long emphasized), our conscious self often plays second fiddle to our unconscious self, and implementation intentions create a simple program for your unconscious mind to control itself. By treating the self more like a robot than a person—if X, then Y, beep—implementation intentions allow you to achieve your goal without ever having to wrestle with the demons of temptation. Not all demons are so easily banished, however, and there is one domain of self-control where not even implementation intentions hold much sway: the control of thoughts.

			At this point in the chapter, we would like you to do a simple task: do not think of a white bear.

			Seriously. Put the book down, and for a few seconds try not to think of a white bear.

			People can frequently do this task for a small amount of time, but then the white bear starts slipping back into consciousness. In fact, the more you try not to think of it, the more frequently and ferociously it appears. This inability to banish thoughts from our minds was addressed by a young Dostoyevsky, who wrote, “Try not to think of a polar bear, and you will see that the cursed thing will come to mind every minute.”35 A century later, one of us (Dan) rediscovered this phenomenon and charted the surprising territory of thought suppression, documenting how the mind struggles to control itself.

			In Dan’s classic study, he followed Dostoyevsky and simply instructed people not to think of a white bear. After five minutes of “thought suppression,” he told them they could think of whatever they wanted. During the entire study, participants recorded how many times a white bear came to mind, and the data revealed an intriguing pattern. People could initially somewhat suppress their thoughts, but after they were freed from mental control, thoughts of white bears powerfully rebounded; white bears were all they could think about. Incredibly, after suppression people thought about the forbidden thought even more than those who were never asked to suppress. This illustrates the ironic effects of mental control:36 attempting to control the mind led it instead to become more unruly. Trying to stop the mind from thinking about something is like trying to stop a three-year-old from playing with a shiny new toy. When you tell it not to do something, it wants to do that thing even more.

			These ironic processes can lead to a variety of striking effects, most of them involving doing exactly the wrong thing at the wrong time. Studies find that ironic mental processes cause golfers to miss putts the harder they try to make them,37 cause people to dream more about people they try not to think about,38 and make the heartbroken talk more about their exes.39 These ironic effects also help explain the terrible persistence of obsessions, whether in everyday life or in extreme cases like obsessive-compulsive disorder. Consider people who are obsessed with cleanliness. The harder they try not to think about the germs swirling around them, the filth colonizing doorknobs and other people’s hands, the more vivid these concerns become and the more powerful their need to disinfect.

			Although people suppress thoughts relatively often, we even more frequently strive for the opposite—concentration—trying to hold thoughts in consciousness and stay focused on work, lovemaking, or our child’s Christmas pageant. Just as we are poor at suppression, we are poor at concentration. If you’ve ever read entire pages of a book only to realize minutes later that you have no idea what you’ve been reading, you know what we’re talking about.

			In fact, as you’ve read this very chapter, there were likely times when your eyes were mechanically reading while your mind drifted away to something else, such as weekend plans or the uncomfortable burbling in your stomach. Although this mind wandering is a common human experience, it is relatively difficult to study because your conscious self is often not aware of it—otherwise it would stop wandering and refocus. This is what makes it so psychologically interesting from a self-knowledge perspective: you can ponder (distracting) thoughts without knowing that you’re thinking them.

			Every challenge has a solution, however, and psychologists Jonathan Schooler and Jonathan Smallwood found a way to study mind wandering in the lab. In their study people read War and Peace (typically regarded as a very boring book) and were told to press a button every time they caught themselves zoning out. Occasionally a prompt would also pop up and ask them if they were paying attention. As it turns out, participants’ minds were wandering 13.2 percent of the time that the prompt popped up. Considering that they received this pop-up prompt only six times during the study, it’s altogether likely that the correct percentage was actually significantly higher.40

			Not only does mind wandering undermine reading comprehension and productivity, but it also makes us unhappy. In a large-scale study led by Matthew Killingsworth, thousands of participants downloaded an iPhone app called Track Your Happiness, which probed people randomly throughout the day, asking them to report what they were currently doing, what they were currently thinking of, and their level of happiness. Unsurprisingly, the researchers found a relationship between the activities people were doing and their happiness: people were happier when hanging out with friends or having sex than they were when taking care of their children or commuting.

			More striking was the high correlation between mind wandering and unhappiness. People who had their mind in the “here and now,” who were thinking about their current activity, were happier than those who were letting their attention wander, even if that “here and now” activity was unpleasant. This suggests that you shouldn’t distract yourself while doing menial tasks but instead focus your attention upon them, perhaps observing how the suds fluff off dinner plates while doing the dishes or marveling at the strength of the smell as you change your daughter’s diaper.41

			The state of being when the mind is fully engaged with a task has been called “flow” by psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi* and is typically experienced when the demands of a task are perfectly matched by your capacities.42 If you have ever felt the minutes slip away while driving winding mountain roads or cooking elaborate meals or painting a fresh canvas, you have experienced flow. Flow is the one time that our restless minds are quiet, when the self disappears and you stop worrying about your work or your weight and focus only on the present. This kind of state sounds blissful—and it is—and so it seems the path to happiness involves making the self disappear. But this presumes that we even know how to define the “self,” that elusive quality that makes you “you.”

			One answer to this question can be arrived at by asking people around you. If you asked your best friend what makes you special, he or she might point to your limitless generosity or your macabre sense of humor or your incredible self-restraint. It seems that there could be as many essences of the self as there are people, each with unique interests and personality, but researchers Nina Strohminger and Shaun Nichols thought there might be something that is most essential. In a series of studies they asked people to envision a scenario in which a man named Jim receives a brain transplant. There were a number of variations on the story: the surgery might have gone perfectly well, or perhaps Jim lost his ability to recognize objects, or perhaps he lost his memory or his motivation.

			The more abilities Jim lost, the more distressing these scenarios were to participants and the more they judged that Jim was someone different. But there was one version of the story in which Jim was judged as most changed, and that was when he lost his sense of morality. Without the ability to know right from wrong, participants judged that Jim was truly transformed into someone else. Someone could forget everything and could lose the ability to walk and talk, but if they still had their same kind (or cruel) heart, they would be perceived to be fundamentally the same person.43

			From the perspective of others, the self seems fundamentally bound to morality, but is the same true of your own perspective? Philosophers have long sought the essence of the self from the inside, asking how you know that you are the same “you” this morning that you were last night. How do you know that you’re not a completely different person from day to day or from year to year? This question is not as crazy as it seems, as you likely have very little in common with seven-year-old you, and yet you cannot help feeling that there is a thread connecting you to him or her. Some candidates for qualities that anchor our identity are our looks (snub-nosed, bushy eyebrows), our personalities (quick to anger or to laugh), our preferences (an insatiable sweet tooth), and our interests (hang gliding or gardening), each of which likely persist over time. One philosopher, Derek Parfit, suggested an even better definition of the self.

			Parfit is a philosopher who was trained and now teaches at Oxford and lives a monastic existence. Most of Parfit’s time is spent alone in thought, and each day he dons the same outfit: a white shirt and black trousers. Interestingly, Parfit has a complete inability to create mental images, so he cannot picture his house or his wife unless they are right in front of him. It is perhaps this difficulty that makes Parfit so uniquely gifted at thinking in the abstract and that is the reason he thinks the central facet of identity is memory.44

			According to Parfit, you know that you are the same person from day to day because your memories remain constant and connect to one another in an orderly chain. Even though you are far older now, you still remember your first waterslide, your first kiss, your first heartbreak, and your first car accident. Even as you accrue more memories, these earlier memories stick around, connecting your future self to your past self.

			To emphasize the importance of memory, Parfit poses a number of thought experiments, many of which involve clones. For example, imagine a teleportation device that could transport you anywhere in the universe instantaneously. This device works by scanning all the matter of your body (and mind), destroying it, and then replicating it from the stored data in another location. Would this process be worth an instant trip to Paris? Would it even be you in Paris? Parfit argues that, yes, it’s you in Paris, because that person/body/mind maintains psychological continuity through the same chain of memories.45

			The centrality of memory in defining the self can make it tenuous, because any memories can potentially be forgotten. When people suffer from Alzheimer’s, they slowly lose all their memories—and therefore themselves. As journalist David Shenk once wrote, “The fear of Alzheimer’s is the fear of losing your identity while your healthy body walks on into oblivion. It is the fear of becoming a ghost.”46

			Beyond being lost, psychology suggests that memories can also be altered, with resulting fundamental changes to the self. In contrast to popular accounts of memories as indelible carvings in the stone tablets of our mind, they are more like theater productions—rough reenactments based on a loose script that changes over time. How many times have you recounted a memory over dinner only to have friends and family (or photos) show that you were mistaken?

			A sense of self based upon something as fragile as memory seems troubling, but to Derek Parfit it is liberating. If the self is merely a chain of memories, then it should be relatively easy to dissolve these links and melt away the distance between ourselves and others. Expressing the exhilaration he felt from this insight, he writes, “My life seemed like a glass tunnel, through which I was moving faster every year, and at the end of which there was darkness. When I changed my view, the walls of my glass tunnel disappeared. I now live in the open air.”47

			To Parfit the self is simply a matter of perception. Just as we perceive the minds of others based upon their words and deeds, so too do we perceive our own minds based upon memories. This means that there is nothing special about ourselves compared with others: each of us is simply a collection of memories, and having one set of memories (your own) doesn’t make you any better or worse than someone else with different memories. Indeed, if you had someone else’s memories and they had yours, you would be them and they would be you. This arbitrariness of identity gave Parfit a profound sense of compassion for other people.

			Parfit is not alone in viewing the self as an arbitrary construction rather than an enduring essence. Daniel Dennett makes an elegant analogy between the self and the center of gravity.48 Any object with mass—whether a bowl, a piece of lumber, or even a brain—has a mathematical center, a precise location that would allow you to balance that object if you were to put it on a pointed stake. However, this center of gravity is not a “thing” that exists independently of all the stuff around it, and if you took apart the object, you would never find a separate little object that is the center of gravity. The self is a lot like that—it’s just the theoretical point that lies at the center of all your mental experiences, memories, thoughts, feelings, sensations, goals, desires, and personal relationships. “You” is like a web without a spider, a collection of memories, thoughts, desires, and feelings that is fragile and tenuous and yet still glimmers in the sunshine of perception.

			Or perhaps a better, if less elegant, analogy is that the self is like particleboard, that mainstay of affordable furniture. To all appearances particleboard is hard and very real, and like the self, it can—metaphorically—bear the weight of other people, break if struck too hard, and has sharp points that can hurt others. It is also fundamentally separate from other pieces of particleboard. However, upon closer inspection you would see that this material is merely a collection of little fibers pressed together and bound with glue. If you placed separate pieces of particleboard in a pool of water, the glue would slowly dissolve until all the fibers separated and floated together, completely intermingling.

			In the case of your mind, the glue that binds together your memories—the fibers of your past experiences—is the fact that they happened to the same body, the same collection of cells that looks back at you in the mirror every morning. Despite the ultimate uncertainty surrounding the question of other minds, it is likely that everyone you know has the same powerful emotions and deep thoughts as you do. Unfortunately, your own collection of memories, thoughts, and feelings—your mind—prevents you from truly appreciating that fact. Being one mind prevents you from truly appreciating the minds of others. This is perhaps the deepest of paradoxes from the mind club.

			Being trapped in our own minds prevents us from fundamentally connecting with others, and there is no way to escape our own minds. We are forever a point of view: even if we lose our memories, meditate away our desires, and quiet our constant quest for mental control, we are still a source of perception. But recognizing this fact provides the secret to transcending ourselves as much as we possibly can. By understanding that we perceive the world instead of understanding it directly, we can realize not only that the self is fragile and that free will is an illusion but also that other minds can be both more and less than they appear.

			Through our odyssey of mysterious minds ranging from dogs to gods, we have seen that all the minds around us—and our very self—rest upon perception. Nevertheless, these perceptions have the psychological force of raw reality and are what compel us to love and to hate, to harm and to protect. The idea of the “mind club” could be interpreted as meaning that these perceptions of mind are not objectively real, but we suggest that they are the only thing that is real. We are perceivers, and from the perspective of perceivers, our perceptions are all we have, and that makes solid the ethereal. As the Buddha said, “Things are not as they are seen, nor are they otherwise.”49 We couldn’t agree more.





		 			Acknowledgments



There is no “I” in “book.” Nor is there “we,” or even “team,” but there is “k” in both “book” and “thanks.” And so we thank the many people who helped with this project along the way.

			First, we thank our agent, Katinka Matson, whose wisdom and guidance helped turn a collection of strange minds into a book proposal. We thank our editor, Melanie Tortoroli, for her deft edits, big-picture vision, infectious excitement, and sage advice. We thank Georgia Bodnar and Hilary Roberts at Viking for overseeing the exacting process of making a manuscript into an actual—and better—book. We also thank the gifted illustrator Nicholas Blechman for making “the mind club” understandable at a glance through his cover design.

			Deep gratitude goes to Kurt’s two lab managers for their work on the manuscript. Peter Schmitt is a marvel at finding stories and studies about mind perception, at coaxing the Internet to reveal its riches, and at writing elegant summaries. Cameron Doyle has the nerves of a fighter pilot, the tenacity of a boxer, the mind of scholar, and a frightening attention to detail—all of which proved essential in finishing up the book.

			Also essential were the illustrations of Jasmine Hromjak, Ryan Lantzy, Hanne Schrickx, and Aaron Scott, which brought zombies, God, animals, and the other cryptominds to life. Shawn Daley saved us with his rendition of sexist ads after we were denied permission by every ad agency in New York.

			We thank the generous funding of NIMH and SSHRC for supporting the research discussed in the book, and are especially grateful to the John Templeton Foundation for seeing the science of mind perception—and other “big questions”—as worthy of funding. We also thank the students of our labs for their intellectual curiosity and hard work, including MPM-labbers Chelsea Schein, Jonathan Keeney, Neil Hester, and Amelia Goranson; Weg-labbers Heather Gray, Andrea Heberlein, Anna Jenkins, Carey Morewedge, Jesse Preston, and Adrian Ward; and the many amazing undergraduate research assistants from both labs.

			For immensely helpful discussions, we thank our colleagues, including those at Harvard, Virginia, Maryland, and Carolina—especially Daniel Gilbert and Keith Payne. We also thank our friends, neighbors, and family, including Dan’s daughters, Kelsey and Haley, and Kurt’s parents, Ann and Phil, Mark and Louise, and in-laws, Sue, Steve, and Kim.

			It almost goes without saying, but the support of our spouses was indispensable. Kristen Lindquist is an absolute saint for marrying me, and for dealing with that book-writing blend of obsession, mania, and neuroticism. As Dan always said before he passed away, he was the lucky one for getting to share his life with Toni Wegner.

			Finally, we must extend our sincerest apologies to cats—including Kurt’s cats, Chas and Cleo—for often maligning them in these pages. Nevertheless, we stand by our statements.





Notes




CHAPTER 1: WELCOME TO THE CLUB

			 1. S. Harnad, “Other Bodies, Other Minds: A Machine Incarnation of an Old Philosophical Problem,” Minds and Machines 1 (1991): 43–54; I. Leudar and A. Costall, “On the Persistence of the ‘Problem of Other Minds’ in Psychology: Chomsky, Grice and Theory of Mind,” Theory & Psychology 14 (2004): 601–21; H. Morick, Wittgenstein and the Problem of Other Minds (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967).

			 2. D. C. Dennett, Kinds of Minds: Toward an Understanding of Consciousness (New York: Basic Books, 1996); D. R. Hofstadter, I am a Strange Loop (New York: Basic Books, 2007).

			 3. M. F. Washburn, The Animal Mind: A Textbook of Comparative Psychology (London: MacMillan, 1908).

			 4. A. M. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind 59 (1950): 433–60.

			 5. A. O. Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1976).

			 6. D. C. Dennett, Kinds of Minds.

			 7. H. M. Gray, K. Gray, and D. M. Wegner, “Dimensions of Mind Perception,” Science 315 (2007): 619.

			 8. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies: Mind Perception and the Uncanny Valley,” Cognition 125 (2012): 125–30.

			 9. K. Gray, T. A. Knickman, and D. M. Wegner, “More Dead Than Dead: Perceptions of Persons in the Persistent Vegetative State,” Cognition 121 (2011): 275–80.

			 10. K. Gray et al., “More Than a Body: Mind Perception and the Nature of Objectification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 101 (2011): 1207–20.

			 11. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “Torture and Judgments of Guilt,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 46 (2010): 233–35.

			 12. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “Blaming God for Our Pain: Human Suffering and the Divine Mind,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 14 (2010): 7–16.

			 13. Gray, Gray, and Wegner, “Dimensions of Mind Perception”; P. Robbins and A. I. Jack, “The Phenomenal Stance,” Philosophical Studies 127 (2006): 59–85.

			 14. Confucius, The Analects, ed. Raymond Dawson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).

			 15. I Ching: Book of Changes, trans. James Legge (New York: Gramercy Books, 1996).

			 16. Laozi, Tao Te Ching, trans. Stephen Mitchell (New York: Harper Collins, 2000).

			 17. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. and ed. Roger Crisp (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014).

			 18. K. Gray, L. Young, and A. Waytz, “Mind Perception Is the Essence of Morality,” Psychological Inquiry 23 (2012): 101–24.

			 19. H. L. A. Hart and T. Honoré, Causation in the Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985).


CHAPTER 2: THE ANIMAL

			 1. E. Fudge, Perceiving Animals: Humans and Beasts in Early Modern English Culture (Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2002).

			 2. J. D. Long, Jainism: An Introduction (London: I.B. Tauris, 2009).

			 3. D. Chamovitz, What a Plant Knows: A Field Guide to the Senses (New York: Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2012).

			 4. R. Dahl, The Collected Short Stories of Roald Dahl (New Delhi: Penguin Books India, 1991).

			 5. M. Heil and R. Karban, “Explaining Evolution of Plant Communication by Airborne Signals,” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 25 (2010): 137–44.

			 6. S. Allmann and I. Baldwin, “Insects Betray Themselves in Nature to Predators by Rapid Isomerization of Green Leaf Volatiles,” Science 329 (2010): 1075–78.

			 7. A. Trewavas, “Aspects of Plant Intelligence,” Annals of Botany 92 (2003): 1–20.

			 8. V. A. Shepherd, “At the Roots of Plant Neurobiology: A Brief History of the Biophysical Research of J. C. Bose,” Science and Culture 78 (2012): 196–210.

			 9. C. Backster, “Evidence of a Primary Perception in Plant Life,” International Journal of Parapsychology 10 (1968): 329–48.

			 10. “Deadly Straw,” MythBusters, Discovery Channel, original air date September 6, 2006.

			 11. P. R. Sanberg, “‘Neural Capacity’ in Mimosa pudica: A Review,” Behavioral Biology 17 (1976): 435–52.

			 12. A. G. Volkov et al., “Kinetics and Mechanism of Dionaea muscipula Trap Closing,” Plant Physiology 146 (2007): 694–702.

			 13. D. C. Dennett, Kinds of Minds: Toward an Understanding of Consciousness (New York: Basic Books, 1996).

			 14. C. K. Morewedge, J. Preston, and D. M. Wegner, “Timescale Bias in the Attribution of Mind,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 93 (2007): 1–11.

			 15. R. W. Mitchell, N. S. Thompson, and H. L. Miles, Anthropomorphism, Anecdotes, and Animals (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1997).

			 16. J. Aronoff, A. M. Barclay, and L. A. Stevenson, “The Recognition of Threatening Facial Stimuli,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 54 (1988): 647–55.

			 17. S. Baron-Cohen, S. Wheelwright, and T. Jolliffe, “Is There a ‘Language of the Eyes’? Evidence from Normal Adults, and Adults with Autism or Asperger Syndrome,” Visual Cognition 4 (1997): 311–31.

			 18. N. J. Emery, “The Eyes Have It: The Neuroethology, Function and Evolution of Social Gaze,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 24 (2000): 581–604.

			 19. J. E. Opfer, “Identifying Living and Sentient Kinds from Dynamic Information: The Case of Goal-Directed Versus Aimless Autonomous Movement in Conceptual Change,” Cognition 86 (2002): 97–122.

			 20. F. Heider and M. Simmel, “An Experimental Study of Apparent Behavior,” American Journal of Psychology 57 (1944): 243–59.

			 21. A. S. Heberlein and R. Adolphs, “Impaired Spontaneous Anthropomorphizing Despite Intact Perception and Social Knowledge,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (2004): 7487–91.

			 22. C. Sanz, D. Morgan, and S. Gulick, “New Insights into Chimpanzees, Tools, and Termites from the Congo Basin,” American Naturalist 164 (2004): 567–81.

			 23. A. C. Hannah and W. C. McGrew, “Chimpanzees Using Stones to Crack Open Oil Palm Nuts in Liberia,” Primates 28 (1987): 31–46.

			 24. “Animal News: Spear-Wielding Chimps Studied,” National Geographic Mission Programs, April 11, 2008, http://video.nationalgeographic.com/video/news/animals-news/chimp-spear-wcvin/.

			 25. G. R. Hunt and R. D. Gray, “The Crafting of Hook Tools by Wild New Caledonian Crows,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 271 (2004): S88–S90.

			 26. A. A. S. Weir, J. Chappell, and A. Kacelnik, “Shaping of Hooks in New Caledonian Crows,” Science 297 (2002): 981.

			 27. “The Crow and the Pitcher,” Aesop’s Fables, www.aesopfables.com/cgi/aesop1.cgi?sel&TheCrowandthePitcher2.

			 28. A. H. Taylor et al., “New Caledonian Crows Learn the Functional Properties of Novel Tool Types,” PLOS ONE 6 (2011): e26887.

			 29. D. J. Povinelli, A. B. Rulf, and D. T. Bierschwale, “Absence of Knowledge Attribution and Self-Recognition in Young Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes),” Journal of Comparative Psychology 108 (1994): 74.

			 30. B. Hare et al., “Chimpanzees Know What Conspecifics Do and Do Not See,” Animal Behaviour 59 (2000): 771–85.

			 31. N. S. Clayton, J. M. Dally, and N. J. Emery, “Social Cognition by Food-Caching Corvids: The Western Scrub-Jay as a Natural Psychologist,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 362 (2007): 507–22.

			 32. A. A. Pack and L. M. Herman, “Bottlenosed Dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) Comprehend the Referent of Both Static and Dynamic Human Gazing and Pointing in an Object-Choice Task,” Journal of Comparative Psychology 118 (2004): 160–71.

			 33. G. Wang et al., “The Genomics of Selection in Dogs and the Parallel Evolution Between Dogs and Humans,” Nature Communications 4 (2013): 1860.

			 34. B. Hare and M. Tomasello, “Domestic Dogs (Canis familiaris) Use Human and Conspecific Social Cues to Locate Hidden Food,” Journal of Comparative Psychology 113 (1999): 173.

			 35. D. O. Hebb, “Emotion in Man and Animal: An Analysis of the Intuitive Processes of Recognition,” Psychological Review 53 (1946): 88.

			 36. M. Lewis and J. Brooks-Gunn, Social Cognition and the Acquisition of Self (New York: Plenum Press, 1979), http://jpepsy.oxfordjournals.org/content/6/4/463.full.pdf.

			 37. G. G. Gallup, “Chimpanzees: Self-Recognition,” Science 167 (1970): 86–87; D. Reiss and L. Marino, “Mirror Self-Recognition in the Bottlenose Dolphin: A Case of Cognitive Convergence,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98 (2001): 5937–42; J. M. Plotnik, F. B. De Waal, and D. Reiss, “Self-Recognition in an Asian Elephant,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (2006): 17053–57.

			 38. M. Rowlands, “The Kindness of Beasts: Dogs Rescue Their Friends and Elephants Care for Injured Kin—Humans Have No Monopoly on Moral Behaviour,” Aeon Magazine, October 24, 2012, http://aeon.co/magazine/being-human/mark-rowlands-animal-morality/; M. Bekoff and J. Pierce, Wild Justice: The Moral Lives of Animals (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2009).

			 39. F. de Waal, “Moral Behavior in Animals,” lecture, TEDxPeachtree, Atlanta, GA, November 2011, http://ted.com/talks/frans_de_waal_do_animals_have_morals.

			 40. S. Robson, “Body of Woman, 56, Who Collapsed and Died in Her Home Is Gnawed and Eaten by Her Own Cats on Her Kitchen Floor,” Daily Mail, August 13, 2013, www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2391223/Janet-Veal-56-gnawed-eaten-CATS-kitchen-floor-died.html.

			 41. R. Schlesinger, “15 Years Ago Today: Gorilla Rescues Boy Who Fell in Ape Pit,” CBS Chicago, August 16, 2011, http://chicago.cbslocal.com/2011/08/16/15-years-ago-today-gorilla-rescues-boy-who-fell-in-ape-pit/.

			 42. S. F. Brosnan and F. B. M. de Waal, “Monkeys Reject Unequal Pay,” Nature 425 (2003): 297–99.

			 43. F. Aureli et al., “Kin-Oriented Redirection Among Japanese Macaques: An Expression of a Revenge System?,” Animal Behaviour 44 (1992): 283–91.

			 44. K. Alvarez and E. van Leeuwen, “Paying It Forward: How Helping Others Can Reduce the Psychological Threat of Receiving Help,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 45 (2015): 1–9, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jasp.12270/abstract; K. Gray, A. F. Ward, and M. I. Norton, “Paying It Forward: Generalized Reciprocity and the Limits of Generosity,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 143 (2014): 247–54.

			 45. K. L. Leimgruber et al., “Give What You Get: Capuchin Monkeys (Cebus apella) and 4-Year-Old Children Pay Forward Positive and Negative Outcomes to Conspecifics,” PLOS ONE 9 (2014): e87035.

			 46. A. Öhman and S. Mineka, “Fears, Phobias, and Preparedness: Toward an Evolved Module of Fear and Fear Learning,” Psychological Review 108 (2001): 483–522.

			 47. Canadian Press, “Swimming Sensation Momo the Cat Escapes Alberta Flood,” CBC News Calgary, June 21, 2013, www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/swimming-sensation-momo-the-cat-escapes-alberta-flood-1.1370290.

			 48. “Animal Fighting Case Study: Michael Vick,” Animal Legal Defense Fund, last revised January 2011, http://aldf.org/resources/laws-cases/animal-fighting-case-study-michael-vick/.

			 49. L. Corner, “Rain Phoenix’s Unusual Childhood,” Guardian, July 8, 2011, www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jul/09/rain-phoenix-river-joaquin-family.

			 50. Rich McCormick, “Judge Gives Chimpanzees Human Rights for the First Time,” The Verge, April 21, 2015, http://www.theverge.com/2015/4/21/8460657/judge-gives-chimpanzees-human-rights-first-time.

			 51. L. Glendinning, “Spanish Parliament Approves ‘Human Rights’ for Apes,” Guardian, June 26, 2008, www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/jun/26/humanrights.animalwelfare; D. G. McNeil Jr., “When Human Rights Extend to Nonhumans,” New York Times, July 13, 2008, www.nytimes.com/2008/07/13/weekinreview/13mcneil.html?pagewanted=all; L. Abend, “In Spain, Human Rights for Apes,” Time, July 18, 2008, http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1824206,00.html.

			 52. J. Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1879).

			 53. R. Descartes, “Discourse on Method,” in Environmental Ethics: Divergence and Convergence, eds. S. J. Armstrong and R. G. Botzler (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993), 281–85, http://dhaydock.org/Philosophy/Unit%202%20-%20Animal%20and%20Machine%20Minds/Descartes%20Animals%20as%20Machines.pdf.

			 54. D. M. Broom, H. Sena, and K. L. Moynihan, “Pigs Learn What a Mirror Image Represents and Use It to Obtain Information,” Animal Behaviour 78 (2009): 1037–41.

			 55. S. Loughnan, N. Haslam, and B. Bastian, “The Role of Meat Consumption in the Denial of Moral Status and Mind to Meat Animals,” Appetite 55 (2010): 156–59.

			 56. B. Bratanova, S. Loughnan, and B. Bastian, “The Effect of Categorization as Food on the Perceived Moral Standing of Animals,” Appetite 57 (2011): 193–96.

			 57. J. S. Foer, Eating Animals (New York: Back Bay Books, 2010).

			 58. D. Moye, “Carlos Romero, Accused of Donkey Sex, Lambastes Florida’s ‘Backwards’ Attitude Towards Animal Sex (NSFW),” Huffington Post, September 18, 2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/09/18/carlos-romero-donkey-sex_n_1894146.html.

			 59. D. J. Bem, “Exotic Becomes Erotic: A Developmental Theory of Sexual Orientation,” Psychological Review 103 (1996): 320.

			 60. J. G. Pfaus, T. E. Kippin, and S. Centeno, “Conditioning and Sexual Behavior: A Review,” Hormones and Behavior 40 (2001): 291–321.

			 61. R. J. McNally and G. S. Steketee, “The Etiology and Maintenance of Severe Animal Phobias,” Behaviour Research and Therapy 23 (1985): 431–35.

			 62. A. L. Pobderscek and A. M. Beetz, Bestiality and Zoophilia: Sexual Relations with Animals (Anthrozoos) (New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2009).

			 63. N. Humphrey, “Bugs and Beasts Before the Law,” Public Domain Review, http://publicdomainreview.org/2011/03/27/bugs-and-beasts-before-the-law.

			 64. D. Nelles, “Wild Justice,” Maisonneuve, September 6, 2012, http://maisonneuve.org/article/2012/09/6/wild-justice/.

			 65. E. V. Walter, “Nature on Trial: The Case of the Rooster That Laid the Egg,” in Methodology, Metaphysics and the History of Science, eds. R. S. Cohn and M. W. Wartofsky (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1984), http://books.google.com/books?id=kGmB1f8svH0C&pg=PA295&lpg=PA295&dq=nature+on+trial+rooster+that+laid+an+egg&source=bl&ots=idR3bm3Dea&sig=_e4HOZ2TYzB6apLFD_nOsjzaDeI&hl=en&sa=X&ei=dZyKUMHzA4O68wTZnIDoAg&ved=0CDQQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q=nature%20on%20trial%20rooster%20that%20laid%20an%20egg&f=false.

			 66. G. Archainbaud, “The Christmas Story,” Lassie, CBS, December 21, 1958.

			 67. J. Old, “Bond Denied for Man Accused of Killing K-9 Deputy,” wistv.com, December 16, 2011, www.wistv.com/story/16338890/k9-deputy-shot-dies.

			 68. “Pittsburgh K-9 Officer Rocco’s Funeral Will Now Be Open to Public,” wxpi.com, January 30, 2014, http://wpxi.com/news/news/k9-officer-stabbed-dies/nc7jG/.


CHAPTER 3: THE MACHINE

			 1. R. Schroeter, Guys and Dolls (documentary), BBC, 2002.

			 2. K. D. Williams, Ostracism: The Power of Silence (New York: Guilford Press, 2002).

			 3. R. F. Baumeister and M. R. Leary, “The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation,” Psychological Bulletin 117 (1995): 497–529.

			 4. T. M. Vogt et al., “Social Networks as Predictors of Ischemic Heart Disease, Cancer, Stroke and Hypertension: Incidence, Survival and Mortality,” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 45 (1992): 659–66.

			 5. W. L. Gardner and M. L. Knowles, “Love Makes You Real: Favorite Television Characters Are Perceived as ‘Real’ in a Social Facilitation Paradigm,” Social Cognition 26 (2008): 156–68.

			 6. N. Epley, A. Waytz, and J. T. Cacioppo, “On Seeing Human: A Three-Factor Theory of Anthropomorphism,” Psychological Review 114 (2007): 864–86.

			 7. S. H. Valverde, “The Modern Sex-Doll Owner: A Descriptive Analysis,” master’s thesis, California State Polytechnic University, 2012, available at http://digitalcommons.calpoly.edu/theses/849/.

			 8. R. Schroeter, Guys and Dolls.

			 9. C. K. Morewedge, “Negativity Bias in Attribution of External Agency,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 138 (2009): 535–45.

			 10. A. Waytz et al., “Making Sense by Making Sentient: Effectance Motivation Increases Anthropomorphism,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 99 (2010): 410–35.

			 11. C. Nass, Y. Moon, and P. Carney, “Are People Polite to Computers? Responses to Computer-Based Interviewing Systems,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 29 (1999): 1093–1110.

			 12. A. De Angeli and R. Carpenter, “Stupid Computer! Abuse and Social Identities,” paper presented at Abuse: the Darker Side of Human Computer Interaction, Rome, September 12, 2005, at www.agentabuse.org/deangeli.pdf.

			 13. N. Epley, A. Waytz, and J. T. Cacioppo, “On Seeing Human: A Three-Factor Theory of Anthropomorphism,” Psychological Review 114 (2007): 864–86; I. Hallgren, “Seeing Agents When We Need To, Attributing Experience When We Feel Like It,” Review of Philosophy and Psychology 3 (2012): 369–82; A. Waytz and L. Young, “Two Motivations for Two Dimensions of Mind,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 55 (2014): 278–83, http://moralitylab.bc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/DualMotivationsMindJESP.pdf.

			 14. D. M. Wegner, R. Erber, and P. Raymond, “Transactive Memory in Close Relationships,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 61 (1991): 923–29.

			 15. A. Clark, Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and the Future of Human Intelligence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).

			 16. B. Sparrow, J. Liu, and D. M. Wegner, “Google Effects on Memory: Cognitive Consequences of Having Information at Our Fingertips,” Science 333 (2011): 776–78.

			 17. S. Ramirez et al., “Creating a False Memory in the Hippocampus,” Science 341 (2013): 387–91; D. Armstrong and M. Ma, “Researcher Controls Colleague’s Motions in 1st Human Brain-to-Brain Interface,” UW Today, August 27, 2013, www.washington.edu/news/2013/08/27/researcher-controls-colleagues-motions-in-1st-human-brain-to-brain-interface/.

			 18. The Terminator, directed by J. Cameron (Hemdale Films, 1984).

			 19. R. Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology (New York: Penguin, 2006).

			 20. G. E. Moore, Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965).

			 21. G. Wood, Edison’s Eve: A Magical History of the Quest for Mechanical Life (New York: Knopf, 2002).

			 22. J. Van den Berg et al., “Superhuman Performance of Surgical Tasks by Robots Using Iterative Learning from Human-Guided Demonstrations,” paper presented at IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Anchorage, AK, May 2010, doi:10.1109/ROBOT.2010.5509621; R. Alterovitz and K. Goldberg, Motion Planning in Medicine: Optimization and Simulation Algorithms for Image-Guided Procedures (Berlin: Springer, 2008).

			 23. D. C. Dennett, “Consciousness in Human and Robot Minds,” paper presented at IIAS Symposium on Cognition, Computation and Consciousness, Kyoto, Japan, September 1994, available at http://cogprints.org/429/1/concrobt.htm.

			 24. A. M. Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind 59 (1950): 433–60.

			 25. W. Buckwalter and M. Phelan, “Does the S&M Robot Feel Guilty?,” unpublished paper, City University of New York, 2011.

			 26. J. Weizenbaum, “ELIZA: A Computer Program for the Study of Natural Language Communication Between Man and Machine,” Communications of the ACM 9 (1966): 36–45.

			 27. “Clever Bots,” Radiolab, WNYC, www.radiolab.org/2011/may/31/clever-bots/?utm_source=sharedUrl&utm_media=metatag&utm_campaign=sharedUrl.

			 28. O. Alexander et al., “The Digital Emily Project: Achieving a Photoreal Digital Actor,” USC Institute for Creative Technologies, http://gl.ict.usc.edu/Research/DigitalEmily/.

			 29. K. F. MacDorman et al., “Too Real for Comfort? Uncanny Responses to Computer Generated Faces,” Computers in Human Behavior 25 (2009): 695–710; J. Seyama and R. S. Nagayama, “The Uncanny Valley: Effect of Realism on the Impression of Artificial Human Faces,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 16 (2007): 337–51.

			 30. S. A. Steckenfinger and A. A. Ghazanfar, “Monkey Visual Behavior Falls into the Uncanny Valley,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 18362–66.

			 31. C. H. Ramey, “The Uncanny Valley of Similarities Concerning Abortion, Baldness, Heaps of Sand and Humanlike Robots,” in Proceedings of Views of the Uncanny Valley Workshop: IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Tsukuba, Japan: December 5–7, 2005), 8–13.

			 32. E. Jentsch, “On the Psychology of the Uncanny,” Angelaki 2 (1906): 7–16.

			 33. S. Freud, The Uncanny (London: Penguin Books, 1919).

			 34. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies: Mind Perception and the Uncanny Valley,” Cognition 125 (2012): 125–30.

			 35. R. Adolphs et al., “A Mechanism for Impaired Fear Recognition After Amygdala Damage,” Nature 433 (2005): 68–72.

			 36. Gray and Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies.”

			 37. J. Sytsma and E. Machery, “Two Conceptions of Subjective Experience,” Philosophical Studies 151 (2009): 299–327.

			 38. Gray and Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies.”

			 39. D. J. Chalmers, “Consciousness and its Place in Nature,” in Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind, eds. S. Stich and F. Warfield (New York: Blackwell, 2003), 1–45.

			 40. Gray and Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies.”

			 41. W. Shakespeare, The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark (New York: Washington Square Press/Pocket Books, 1992).

			 42. G. Orwell, 1984 (New York: Signet Classics, 1950).

			 43. Gray and Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies.”

			 44. C. Breazeal, “Emotion and Sociable Humanoid Robots,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 59 (2003): 119–55.

			 45. C. Breazeal, Designing Sociable Robots (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004).

			 46. T. Miedaner, “The Soul of the Mark III Beast,” in The Mind’s I: Fantasies and Reflections on Self and Soul (New York: Basic Books, 1981), 109–113.

			 47. C. Bartneck et al., “‘Daisy, Daisy, Give Me Your Answer Do!’ Switching Off a Robot,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (Washington, DC: March 9–11, 2007), 217–22, www.bartneck.de/publications/2007/daisy/.

			 48. M. Garber, “Funerals for Fallen Robots,” Atlantic, September 20, 2013, www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/09/funerals-for-fallen-robots/279861/.

			 49. I. Asimov, I, Robot (New York: Signet Books, 1956).


CHAPTER 4: THE PATIENT

			 1. C. Siemaszko, “20 Years Ago: Lorena Bobbitt Cuts Off Penis of Then Husband John Wayne Bobbitt in Case That Horrified—and Fascinated—the Nation,” New York Daily News, June 23, 2013, available at www.nydailynews.com/news/crime/20-years-today-lorena-bobbitt-cuts-husband-penis-case-horrified-fascinated-nation-article-1.1379112.

			 2. E. Scarry, The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), available at http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=uFluGXva-ZkC&oi=fnd&pg=PA3&dq=language+pain+expression+scarry&ots=FeZxX6UVE_&sig=wEaB23T79aKAr9MYdXxGw2R9nlc#v=onepage&q=language%20pain%20expression%20scarry&f=false.

			 3. D. Purves et al., “Central Pain Pathways: The Spinothalamic Tract,” in Neuroscience (Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 2001), at www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK10967/.

			 4. American Chronic Pain Association, “Neuropathic Pain,” www.theacpa.org/condition/neuropathic-pain.

			 5. Leprosy Mission International, “What Is Leprosy?,” www.leprosymission.org/what-is-leprosy.html.

			 6. V. S. Ramachandran and D. Rogers-Ramachandran, “Synaesthesia in Phantom Limbs Induced with Mirrors,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 263 (1996): 377–86.

			 7. J. L. Straus and S. von Ammon Cavanaugh, “Placebo Effects: Issues for Clinical Practice in Psychiatry and Medicine,” Psychosomatics 37 (1996): 315–26; T. Koyama et al., “The Subjective Experience of Pain: Where Expectations Become Reality,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 (2005): 12950–55.

			 8. C. M. Williams et al., “Efficacy of Paracetamol for Acute Low-Back Pain: A Double-Blind, Randomised Controlled Trial,” Lancet 384 (2014): 1586–96.

			 9. I. Kirsch et al., “Initial Severity and Antidepressant Benefits: A Meta-analysis of Data Submitted to the Food and Drug Administration,” PLOS Medicine 5 (2008): e45.

			 10. I. Kirsch, “Challenging Received Wisdom: Antidepressants and the Placebo Effect,” McGill Journal of Medicine 11 (2008): 219–22; J. R. Davidson et al., “Fluoxetine, Comprehensive Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, and Placebo in Generalized Social Phobia,” Archives of General Psychiatry 61 (2004): 1005.

			 11. A. Catlin and R. L. Taylor-Ford, “Investigation of Standard Care Versus Sham Reiki Placebo Versus Actual Reiki Therapy to Enhance Comfort and Well-Being in a Chemotherapy Infusion Center,” Oncology Nursing Forum 38 (2011): E212–20; N. Assefi et al., “Reiki for the Treatment of Fibromyalgia: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 14 (2008): 1115–22.

			 12. T. Brygge et al., “Reflexology and Bronchial Asthma,” Respiratory Medicine 95 (2001): 173–79; J. Jones et al., “Reflexology Has No Immediate Haemodynamic Effect in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure: A Double Blind Randomised Controlled Trial,” Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice 19 (2013): 133–38.

			 13. M. Frith, “Urine: The Body’s Own Health Drink?” Independent, February 21, 2006, www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/urine-the-bodys-own-health-drink-467303.html.

			 14. H. Gurnee, The Late Show with David Letterman, original air date March 31, 1994.

			 15. J. Caple, “Pee Is Only a Wee Bit Gross,” Page 2, ESPN, http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/page2/story?page=caple/040511.

			 16. American Cancer Society, “Placebo Effect” (last revised April 10, 2015), www.cancer.org/treatment/treatmentsandsideeffects/complementaryandalternativemedicine/placebo-effect.

			 17. A. Schweiger and A. Parducci, “Nocebo: The Psychologic Induction of Pain,” Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science 16 (1981): 140–43.

			 18. A. Arntz and L. Claassens, “The Meaning of Pain Influences Its Experienced Intensity,” Pain 109 (2004): 20–25.

			 19. A. D. Craig and M. C. Bushnell, “The Thermal Grill Illusion: Unmasking the Burn of Cold Pain,” Science 265 (1994): 252–55.

			 20. R. Melzack, “The McGill Pain Questionnaire: From Description to Measurement,” Anesthesiology 103 (2005): 199–202; R. Melzack and P. D. Wall, “Pain Mechanisms: A New Theory,” Science 150 (1965): 971–79.

			 21. R. C. Kupers et al., “Morphine Differentially Affects the Sensory and Effective Pain Ratings in Neurogenic and Idiopathic Forms of Pain,” Pain 47 (1991): 5–12.

			 22. Kemi, “Hit by Car, Hit by Morphine,” Erowid Experience Vaults, March 4, 2011, www.erowid.org/experiences/exp.php?ID=28149.

			 23. A. Gopnik and J. W. Astington, “Children’s Understanding of Representational Change and Its Relation to the Understanding of False Belief and the Appearance-Reality Distinction,” Child Development 59 (1988): 26–37.

			 24. N. Epley, C. K. Morewedge, and B. Keysar, “Perspective Taking in Children and Adults: Equivalent Egocentrism but Differential Correction,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 40 (2004): 760–68; J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971).

			 25. D. Hume, Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary (Indianapolis, IN: Library of Economics and Liberty, 1987), www.econlib.org/library/LFBooks/Hume/hmMPL1.html.

			 26. A. Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1759).

			 27. Epley, Morewedge, and Keysar, “Perspective Taking in Children and Adults.”

			 28. R. Gordon, “Folk Psychology as Simulation,” Mind & Language 2 (1986): 158–71, 571–80; T. Singer et al., “Empathy for Pain Involves the Affective but Not Sensory Components of Pain,” Science 303 (2004): 1157–62.

			 29. B. Pascal, “On the Means of Belief,” in Pensées (1669), www.bartleby.com/48/1/4.html.

			 30. C. D. Burt and K. Strongman, “Use of Images in Charity Advertising: Improving Donations and Compliance Rates,” International Journal of Organisational Behaviour 8 (2005): 571–80.

			 			 			 			 			 			 31. P. Singer, “The Drowning Child and the Expanding Circle,” New Internationalist, April 1997, www.utilitarian.net/singer/by/199704--.htm.

			 32. B. Cialdini et al., “Reinterpreting the Empathy-Altruism Relationship: When One Into One Equals Oneness,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73 (1997): 481–94.

			 33. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “Feeling Robots and Human Zombies: Mind Perception and the Uncanny Valley,” Cognition 125 (2012): 125–30; A. J. M. Dijker, “Perceived Vulnerability as a Common Basis of Moral Emotions,” British Journal of Social Psychology 49 (2010): 415–23.

			 34. Dijker, “Perceived Vulnerability as a Common Basis of Moral Emotions.”

			 35. B. Hutchinson, “Raging Rivers? Fur Sure! Park Ave. Attack on Sable Coat,” New York Daily News, December 17, 1997, www.nydailynews.com/archives/news/raging-rivers-fur-park-ave-attack-sable-coat-article-1.783036.

			 36. S. Russel, “When Extreme Animal Rights Activists Attack,” Pacific Standard, March 16, 2012, www.psmag.com/legal-affairs/when-extreme-animal-rights-activists-attack-40430; J. Doward, “Kill Scientists, Says Animal Rights Chief,” Guardian, July 25, 2004, www.theguardian.com/society/2004/jul/25/health.animalrights.

			 37. M. S. James, “Prison Is ‘Living Hell’ for Pedophiles,” ABC News, August 26, 2003, http://abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=90004.

			 38. Dijker, “Perceived Vulnerability as a Common Basis of Moral Emotions.”

			 39. C. D. Cameron and B. K. Payne, “Escaping Affect: How Motivated Emotion Regulation Creates Insensitivity to Mass Suffering,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100 (2011): 1–15.

			 40. L. Logan, “The Problem with How We Treat Bipolar Disorder,” New York Times, April 26, 2013, http://mobile.nytimes.com/2013/04/28/magazine/the-problem-with-how-we-treat-bipolar-disorder.html?from=science.

			 41. D. R. Rhodes et al., “Speaking and Interruptions During Primary Care Office Visits,” Family Medicine 33 (2001): 528–32.

			 42. J. Halpern, “What Is Clinical Empathy?,” Journal of General Internal Medicine 18 (2003): 670–74; O. S. Haque and A. Waytz, “Dehumanization in Medicine: Causes, Solutions, and Functions,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 7 (2012): 176–86.

			 43. D. Schulman-Green, “Coping Mechanisms of Physicians Who Routinely Work with Dying Patients,” OMEGA: Journal of Death Dying 47 (2003): 253–64.

			 44. T. Szasz, The Second Sin (Garden City, NY: Anchor Press, 1973).

			 45. H. H. Strupp and S. W. Hadley, “Specific vs. Nonspecific Factors in Psychotherapy: A Controlled Study of Outcome,” Archives of General Psychiatry 36 (1979): 1125–36.

			 46. T. Furmark et al., “Common Changes in Cerebral Blood Flow in Patients with Social Phobia Treated with Citalopram or Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy,” Archives of General Psychiatry 59 (2002): 425–33; L. R. Baxter, J. M. Schwartz, and K. S. Bergman, “Caudate Glucose Metabolic Rate Changes with Both Drug and Behavior Therapy for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder,” Archives of General Psychiatry 49 (1992): 681–89; P. Porto et al., “Does Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Change the Brain? A Systematic Review of Neuroimaging in Anxiety Disorders,” Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 21 (2009): 114–25.

			 47. A. Nadler and J. D. Fisher, “The Role of Threat to Self-Esteem and Perceived Control in Recipient Reaction to Help: Theory Development and Empirical Validation,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. L. Berkowitz (Orlando, FL: Academic Press, 1986), 19, 81–116.

			 48. S. L. Brown et al., “Caregiving Behavior Is Associated with Decreased Mortality Risk,” Psychological Science 20 (2009): 488–94.

			 49. E. I. Langer and J. Rodin, “The Effects of Choice and Enhanced Personal Responsibility for the Aged: A Field Experiment in an Institutional Setting,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 34 (1976): 191–98.

			 50. D. Breese, “Son Lifts Car Off Father’s Chest,” Alaska Star, May 29, 2008, http://classic.alaskastar.com/stories/052908/new_20080529003.shtml.

			 51. K. Gray, “Moral Transformation: Good and Evil Turn the Weak into the Mighty,” Social Psychology and Personality Science 1 (2010): 253–58.

			 52. M. K. Gandhi, Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with Truth, trans. M. Desai (New York: Dover, 1983).

			 53. A. Grant, Give and Take (New York: Viking, 2013).

			 54. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “Moral Typecasting: Divergent Perceptions of Moral Agents and Moral Patients,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 96 (2009): 505–20.

			 55. Gray and Wegner, “Moral Typecasting.”

			 56. G. Spence, Win Your Case: How to Present, Persuade, and Prevail—Every Place, Every Time (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2006).

			 57. Daily Mail reporter, “‘Affluenza’ Teen Ethan Couch Reaches Undisclosed Settlement with Victims’ Families,” Daily Mail Online, March 18, 2014, available at www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2583768/Affluenza-teen-avoided-jail-fatal-drunk-driving-accident-reaches-undisclosed-settlement-two-three-families-victims.html.

			 58. K. Gray and D. M. Wegner, “To Escape Blame, Don’t Be a Hero—Be a Victim,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47 (2011): 516–19.

			 59. L. A. Zebrowitz and S. M. McDonald, “The Impact of Litigants’ Baby-facedness and Attractiveness on Adjudications in Small Claims Courts,” Law and Human Behavior 15 (1991): 603–23.

			 60. “1993: Two Boys Charged with Toddler’s Murder,” BBC: On This Day, http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/february/20/newsid_2552000/2552185.stm.

			 61. C. Alexander, “Parting Glances: Oranges & Lemons Sliced,” PrideSource, February 2, 2006, www.pridesource.com/article.html?article=17348.

			 62. J. Leclaire, “Satan’s End-Time Strategy to Outlaw Traditional Marriage in Full Swing,” Charisma News, June 26, 2013, www.charismanews.com/opinion/watchman-on-the-wall/40034-satan-s-end-time-strategy-to-outlaw-traditional-marriage-in-full-swing.

			 63. P. DeScioli, S. Gilbert, and R. Kurzban, “Indelible Victims and Persistent Punishers in Moral Cognition,” Psychological Inquiry 23 (2012): 143–49.

			 64. K. Gray, C. Schein, and A. F. Ward, “The Myth of Harmless Wrongs in Moral Cognition: Automatic Dyadic Completion from Sin to Suffering,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 143 (2014): 1600–15.

			 65. J. Haidt, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion (New York: Pantheon Books, 2012).

			 66. J. Graham, J. Haidt, and B. A. Nosek, “Liberals and Conservatives Rely on Different Sets of Moral Foundations,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 96 (2009): 1029–46.


CHAPTER 5: THE ENEMY

			 1. L. Siems, “Mohamedou Ould Slahi’s Guantánamo Memoirs: How the United States Kept a Gitmo Detainee Silent for More Than a Decade,” Slate, April 30, 2013, www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/foreigners/2013/04/mohamedou_ould_slahi_s_guant_namo_memoirs_how_the_united_states_kept_a_gitmo.html.

			 2. C. D. Leonnig and D. Priest, “Detainees Accuse Female Interrogators,” Washington Post, February 10, 2005, A01.

			 3. Ina and Lacy Pauley family, “Hatfield-McCoy Feud Timeline,” http://dpauley.us/Feud_Timeline.pdf.

			 4. Y. Dunham, A. S. Baron, and S. Carey, “Consequences of ‘Minimal’ Group Affiliations in Children,” Child Development 82 (2011): 793–811.

			 5. M. Billig and H. Tajfel, “Social Categorization and Similarity in Intergroup Behaviour,” European Journal of Social Psychology 3 (1973): 27–52.

			 6. Ibid.

			 7. Ibid.

			 8. S. Bloom, “Lesson of a Lifetime,” Smithsonian, September 2005, www.smithsonianmag.com/history-archaeology/lesson_lifetime.html.

			 9. M. Sherif, Intergroup Conflict and Cooperation: The Robbers Cave Experiment (Norman, OK: University Book Exchange, 1961).

			 10. J. C. Mitani, D. P. Watts, and S. J. Amsler, “Lethal Intergroup Aggression Leads to Territorial Expansion in Wild Chimpanzees,” Current Biology 20 (2010): 507–8.

			 11. F. de Waal, “The Brutal Elimination of a Rival Among Captive Male Chimpanzees,” Ethology and Sociobiology 7 (1986): 237–51.

			 12. J. Goodall, “Infant Killing and Cannibalism in Free-Living Chimpanzees,” Folia Primatologica 28 (1977): 259–89.

			 13. “Chimpanzee Attack Leaves Man in Intensive Care in South Africa,” Guardian, June 29, 2012, www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/29/chimpanzee-attacks-researcher-south-africa.

			 14. D. Quammen, “The Left Bank Ape: An Exclusive Look at Bonobos,” National Geographic, March 2013, http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2013/03/125-bonobos/quammen-text.

			 15. A. R. Krosch and D. M. Amodio, “Economic Scarcity Alters the Perception of Race,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (2014): 9079–84.

			 16. N. Haslam, “Dehumanization: An Integrative Review,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 10 (2006): 252–64.

			 17. L. Back and J. Solomos, Theories of Race and Racism (New York: Routledge, 2000).

			 18. D. Hopkins, Down, Up, and Over: Slave Religion and Black Theology (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2000), 28.

			 19. P. A. Goff et al., “Not Yet Human: Implicit Knowledge, Historical Dehumanization, and Contemporary Consequences,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94 (2008): 292–306.

			 20. P. G. Devine, “Stereotypes and Prejudice: Their Automatic and Controlled Components,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56 (1989): 5–18.

			 21. R. Shapiro and J. Mirkinson, “Republican Attendees Threw Nuts at Black CNN Camerawoman, Called Her an ‘Animal,’” Huffington Post, August 28, 2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/28/republican-cnn-attack-animal-peanuts-racist_n_1838249.html.

			 22. M. Luther, Table Talk, ed. W. Hazlitt (Grand Rapids, MI: Christian Classics Ethereal Library, 2004), 227, http://ntslibrary.com/PDF%20Books/Luther%20Table%20Talk.pdf.

			 23. A. Chua, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother (New York: Penguin Press, 2011), 26.

			 24. C. Geronimi, Education for Death (Walt Disney Pictures, 1943), www.youtube.com/watch?v=eU1LHeim_hA.

			 25. I. Kant, The Metaphysical Elements of Ethics (Echo Library, 1780): 163.

			 26. M. C. Nussbaum, “Objectification,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 24 (1995): 249–91.

			 27. T. Saguy et al., “Interacting Like a Body,” Psychological Science 21 (2010): 178–82.

			 28. D. Archer et al., “Face-ism: Five Studies of Sex Differences in Facial Prominence,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 45 (1983): 725–35.

			 29. Ibid.

			 30. N. Schwarz and E. Kurz, “What’s in a Picture? The Impact of Face-ism on Trait Attribution,” European Journal of Social Psychology 19 (1989): 311–16.

			 31. K. Gray et al., “More Than a Body: Mind Perception and the Nature of Objectification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 101 (2011): 1207–20.

			 32. N. A. Heflick et al., “From Women to Objects: Appearance Focus, Target Gender, and Perceptions of Warmth, Morality and Competence,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47 (2011): 572–81.

			 33. M. Cikara, J. L. Eberhardt, and S. T. Fiske, “From Agents to Objects: Sexist Attitudes and Neural Responses to Sexualized Targets,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 (2010): 540–51.

			 34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASDs),” 2013, www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html.

			 35. S. Baron-Cohen, Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995); P. Carruthers, “Autism as Mind-Blindness: An Elaboration and Partial Defence,” in Theories of Theories of Mind, eds. P. Carruthers and P. K. Smith (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 257–73.

			 36. L. M. Oberman and V. S. Ramachandran, “The Simulating Social Mind: The Role of the Mirror Neuron System and Simulation in the Social and Communicative Deficits of Autism Spectrum Disorders,” Psychological Bulletin 133 (2007): 310–27.

			 37. S. Baron-Cohen, A. M. Leslie, and U. Frith, “Does the Autistic Child Have a ‘Theory of Mind’?,” Cognition 21 (1985): 37–46.

			 38. L. Kanner, “Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact,” Nervous Child 2 (1943): 217–50.

			 39. Ibid.

			 40. K. Gray et al., “Distortions of Mind Perception in Psychopathology,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (2011): 477–79.

			 41. L. Surian and A. M. Leslie, “Competence and Performance in False Belief Understanding: A Comparison of Autistic and Normal 3-Year-Old Children,” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 17 (1999): 141–55.

			 42. Gray et al., “Distortions of Mind Perception in Psychopathology”; J. M. Moran et al., “Impaired Theory of Mind for Moral Judgment in High-Functioning Autism,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (2011): 2688–92.

			 43. NPR staff, “‘Best Practices’: Learning to Live with Asperger’s,” All Things Considered, NPR, February 3, 2012, www.kqed.org/news/story/2012/02/03/83577/best_practices_learning_to_live_with_aspergers.

			 44. H. M. Cleckley, The Mask of Sanity: An Attempt to Clarify Some Issues About the So-called Psychopathic Personality (Maryland Heights, MO: Mosby, 1955).

			 45. B. B. Lahey et al., “Predicting Future Antisocial Personality Disorder in Males from a Clinical Assessment in Childhood,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 73 (2005): 389–99.

			 46. G. Fairchild et al., “Facial Expression Recognition, Fear Conditioning, and Startle Modulation in Female Subjects with Conduct Disorder,” Biological Psychiatry 68 (2010): 272–79.

			 47. P. Babiak, C. S. Neumann, and R. D. Hare, “Corporate Psychopathy: Talking the Walk,” Behavioral Sciences & the Law 28 (2010): 174–93.

			 48. M. Koenigs et al., “Damage to the Prefrontal Cortex Increases Utilitarian Moral Judgments,” Nature 446 (2007): 908–11.

			 49. R. J. R. Blair, “The Amygdala and Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex in Morality and Psychopathy,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (2007): 387-92.

			 50. L. G. Aspinwall, T. R. Brown, and J. Tabery, “The Double-Edged Sword: Does Biomechanism Increase or Decrease Judges’ Sentencing of Psychopaths?,” Science 337 (2012): 846–49.

			 51. D. A. Davis, The Jeffrey Dahmer Story: An American Nightmare (New York: St. Martin’s Paperbacks, 1991).

			 52. Z. Rubin and A. Peplau, “Belief in a Just World and Reactions to Another’s Lot: A Study of Participants in the National Draft Lottery,” Journal of Social Issues 29 (1973): 73–93.

			 53. M. Lerner, The Belief in a Just World: A Fundamental Delusion (New York: Springer, 1980).

			 54. A. Elliott, “Complications Grow for Muslims Serving in U.S.,” New York Times, November 8, 2009, A1.

			 55. J. Stephens and J. Jouvenal, “Muslim Cabdriver Alleges Assault by Passenger Who Cited Boston Bombing,” Washington Post, April 30, 2013, available at www.washingtonpost.com/local/muslim-cabdriver-alleges-assault-by-passenger-who-cited-boston-bombings/2013/04/30/9fa45a7c-b0d2-11e2-bbf2-a6f9e9d79e19_story.html.

			 56. “Rwanda: How the Genocide Happened,” BBC News, May 17, 2011, at www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-13431486.

			 57. E. L. Paluck, “Reducing Intergroup Prejudice and Conflict Using the Media: A Field Experiment in Rwanda,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 96 (2009): 574–87.

			 58. M. Eksteins, Rites of Spring: The Great War and the Birth of the Modern Age (New York: Mariner Books, 2000).


CHAPTER 6: THE SILENT

			 1. M. Roach, Stiff: The Curious Lives of Human Cadavers (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2003), discussed at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stiff:_The_Curious_Lives_of_Human_Cadavers.

			 2. E. A. Poe, “The Tell-Tale Heart,” The Pioneer 1 (1843).

			 3. S. Spielberg, Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (Paramount Pictures, 1984); R. Hughart and B. Haaland, “War Is the H-Word,” Futurama, November 26, 2000; V. Salva, Jeepers Creepers (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 2001); T. Maylam, Split Second (Astro Distribution, 1992).

			 4. A. M. Capron and L. R. Kass, “A Statutory Definition of the Standards for Determining Human Death: An Appraisal and a Proposal,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 121 (1972): 87–118.

			 5. “‘My Lobotomy’: Howard Dully’s Journey,” All Things Considered, NPR, November 16, 2005, www.npr.org/2005/11/16/5014080/my-lobotomy-howard-dullys-journey.

			 6. “Prefrontal Lobotomy,” Journal of the American Medical Association 123 (1943): 418–20.

			 7. W. L. Laurence, “Lobotomy Banned in Soviet as Cruel,” New York Times, August 22, 1953, 13.

			 8. J. R. Thogmartin, “Report of Autopsy,” Medical Examiner District Six, Pasco & Pinellas Counties, June 13, 2005, www.blogsforterri.com/archives/5050439_autopsy%20report%20and%20supporting%20documents.pdf.

			 9. D. S. Weisberg et al., “The Seductive Allure of Neuroscience Explanations,” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 20 (2011): 470–77; A. Quart, “Neuroscience: Under Attack,” New York Times, November 23, 2012, available at www.nytimes.com/2012/11/25/opinion/sunday/neuroscience-under-attack.html.

			 10. D. L. Ames et al., “Taking Another Person’s Perspective Increases Self-Referential Neural Processing,” Psychological Science 19 (2008): 642–44.

			 11. J. P. Mitchell, “Inferences About Mental States,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364 (2009): 1309–16.

			 12. J. Hashmi et al., “Effect of Pulsing in Low-Level Light Therapy,” Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 42 (2010): 450–66.

			 13. I. Feinberg, “Changing Concepts of the Function of Sleep: Discovery of Intense Brain Activity During Sleep Calls for Revision of Hypotheses as to Its Function,” Biological Psychiatry 1 (1969): 331–48.

			 14. S. Herculano-Houzel, “Sleep It Out,” Science 342 (2013): 316–17; J. M. Siegel, “Clues to the Functions of Mammalian Sleep,” Nature 437 (2005): 1264–71; J. M. Siegel, “Why We Sleep,” Scientific American 289 (2003): 92–97.

			 15. Siegel, “Clues to the Functions of Mammalian Sleep.”

			 16. E. Kobylarz and N. Schiff, “Neurophysiological Correlates of Persistent Vegetative and Minimally Conscious States,” Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 15 (2005): 323–32.

			 17. S. Laureys, A. M. Owen, and N. D. Schiff, “Brain Function in Coma, Vegetative State, and Related Disorders,” Lancet Neurology 3 (2004): 537–46.

			 18. E. Landsness et al., “Electrophysiological Correlates of Behavioural Changes in Vigilance in Vegetative State and Minimally Conscious State,” Brain 134 (2011): 2222–32.

			 19. F. Perrin et al., “Brain Response to One’s Own Name in Vegetative State, Minimally Conscious State, and Locked-In Syndrome,” Archives of Neurology 63 (2006): 562–69.

			 20. The Multi-Society Task Force on PVS, “Medical Aspects of the Persistent Vegetative State,” New England Journal of Medicine 330 (1994): 1499–1508, http://nejm.org/doi/pdf/10.1056/NEJM199405263302107.

			 21. O. Pfungst, Clever Hans (The Horse of Mr. Von Osten): A Contribution to Experimental Animal and Human Psychology (Project Gutenberg, 1911), www.gutenberg.org/files/33936/33936-h/33936-h.htm#CHAPTER_II.

			 22. H. Sharon et al., “Emotional Processing of Personally Familiar Faces in the Vegetative State,” PLOS ONE 8 (2013): e74711.

			 23. L. Gómez-Gómez, “Plant Perception Systems for Pathogen Recognition and Defence,” Molecular Immunology 41 (2004): 1055–62; E. E. Farmer and C. A. Ryan, “Interplant Communication: Airborne Methyl Jasmonate Induces Synthesis of Proteinase Inhibitors in Plant Leaves,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 87 (1990): 7713–16; D. F. Rhoades, “Responses of Alder and Willow to Attack by Tent Caterpillars and Webworms: Evidence for Pheromonal Sensitivity of Willows,” in Plant Resistance to Insects, ed. P. A. Hedin, (Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 1983), 55–68.

			 24. A. M. Owen and M. R. Coleman, “Detecting Awareness in the Vegetative State,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1129 (2008): 130–38.

			 25. T. Judt, “Night,” New York Review of Books, January 14, 2010, available at www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/jan/14/night/.

			 26. R. Christopher deCharms et al., “Control Over Brain Activation and Pain Learned by Using Real-Time Functional MRI,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102 (2005): 18626–31.

			 27. I. Parker, “Reading Minds: If a Person Cannot Move, Talk, or Even Blink, Is It Possible to Communicate with His Brain?,” New Yorker, January 20, 2003, 52.

			 28. J. Foer, “The Unspeakable Odyssey of the Motionless Boy,” Esquire, October 2, 2008, available at www.esquire.com/features/unspeakable-odyssey-motionless-boy-1008.

			 29. Times staff writer, “Julia Tavalaro, 68; Poet and Author Noted for Defying Severe Paralysis,” Los Angeles Times, December 21, 2003, http://articles.latimes.com/2003/dec/21/local/me-tavalaro21.

			 30. Nicklinson v. Ministry of Justice, High Court of Justice, Queen’s Bench Division, Administrative Court, August 16, 2012, https://judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/JCO/Documents/Judgments/nicklinson-judgment-16082012.pdf.

			 31. Transcript of conversation between Armin Meiwes and Bernd-Jürgen Brandes, 2001, http://pastebin.com/9z2ZxVX3.

			 32. “German Cannibal Gets Eight-and-a-Half Years,” Guardian, January 30, 2004, www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/jan/30/germany.world.

			 33. Nicklinson v. Ministry of Justice.

			 34. J. F. Burns, “Tony Nicklinson, Who Fought for Assisted Suicide, Dies at 58,” New York Times, August 22, 2012, A9.

			 35. P. Brickman, D. Coates, and R. Janoff-Bulman, “Lottery Winners and Accident Victims: Is Happiness Relative?,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 36 (1978): 917–27.

			 36. M. Murrell, “With Help from Friends, Paraplegic Returns to Hunting,” Topeka Capital-Journal, May 18, 2013, http://cjonline.com/sports/2013-05-18/marc-murrell-help-friends-paraplegic-returns-hunting; M. Rubenstein, “Pasco Paraplegic Finds Himself in Faith and Family,” Tampa Bay Times, June 24, 2011, www.tampabay.com/news/humaninterest/pasco-paraplegic-finds-himself-in-faith-and-family/1177251.

			 37. P. W. Chen, “Making Your Wishes Known at the End of Life,” New York Times, April 15, 2010, www.nytimes.com/2010/04/16/health/15chen.html?ref=health.

			 38. T. Lewin, “Ignoring ‘Right to Die’ Directives, Medical Community is Being Sued,” New York Times, June 2, 1996, www.nytimes.com/1996/06/02/us/ignoring-right-to-die-directives-medical-community-is-being-sued.html; E. Lavandera, J. Rubin, and G. Botelho, “Texas Judge: Remove Brain-Dead Woman from Ventilator,” CNN, January 24, 2014, www.cnn.com/2014/01/24/health/pregnant-brain-dead-woman-texas/index.html?hpt=hp_t1.

			 39. K. Gray, T. A. Knickman, and D. M. Wegner, “More Dead Than Dead: Perceptions of Persons in the Persistent Vegetative State,” Cognition 121 (2011): 275–80.

			 40. B. K. Waltke, “Old Testament Texts Bearing on the Problem of the Control of Human Reproduction,” in Birth Control and the Christian, eds. W. O. Spitzer and C. L. Saylor (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale House, 1969), 5–23.

			 41. C. Stipe et al., “A Protestant Affirmation on the Control of Human Reproduction,” Journal of the American Scientific Affiliation 22 (1970): 46–47.

			 42. W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1765), http://press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders/documents/amendIXs1.html.

			 43. A. Smith, A Complete History of the Lives and Robberies of the Most Notorious Highwaymen, Footpads, Shoplifts, & Cheats of Both Sexes (1714; London: George Routledge & Sons, Ltd, 1926).

			 44. S. J. Lee et al., “Fetal Pain: A Systematic Multidisciplinary Review of the Evidence,” Journal of the American Medical Association 294 (2005): 947–54.

			 45. “New Law Requires Women to Name Baby, Paint Nursery Before Getting Abortion,” Onion, January 14, 2010, www.theonion.com/video/new-law-requires-women-to-name-baby-paint-nursery,14393/.

			 46. J. S. Bard, “The Diagnosis Is Anencephaly and the Parents Ask About Organ Donation: Now What? A Guide for Hospital Counsel and Ethics Committees,” Western New England Law Review 21 (1999): 49–95.

			 47. V. Starnes et al., “Cardiac Transplantation in Children and Adolescents,” Circulation 76 (1987): V43–47; J. J. Malatack et al., “Choosing a Pediatric Recipient for Orthotopic Liver Transplantation,” Journal of Pediatrics 111 (1987): 479–89; B. J. Zitelli et al., “Evaluation of the Pediatric Patient for Liver Transplantation,” Journal of Pediatrics 78 (1986): 559–65.

			 48. J. Palfreman, “Prisoners of Silence,” Frontline, PBS, October 19, 1993.

			 49. D. L. Wheeler et al., “An Experimental Assessment of Facilitated Communication,” Mental Retardation 31 (1993): 49–59.


CHAPTER 7: THE GROUP

			 1. L. Spinney, “Karma of the Crowd,” National Geographic, February 2014, http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2014/02/kumbh-mela/spinney-text.

			 2. G. Humphrey, “The Psychology of the Gestalt,” Journal of Educational Psychology 15 (1924): 401–12.

			 3. R. Wageman, “Interdependence and Group Effectiveness,” Administrative Science Quarterly 40 (1995): 145–80.

			 4. A. J. Morton and L. Avanzo, “Executive Decision-Making in the Domestic Sheep,” PLOS ONE 6 (2011): e15752.

			 5. A. Waytz and L. Young, “The Group-Member Mind Tradeoff: Attributing Mind to Groups Versus Group Members,” Psychological Science 23 (2012): 77–85.

			 6. C. K. Morewedge et al., “Lost in the Crowd: Entitative Group Membership Reduces Mind Attribution,” Consciousness and Cognition 22 (2013): 1195–205.

			 7. Waytz and Young, “The Group-Member Mind Tradeoff.”

			 8. J. Knobe and J. Prinz, “Intuitions About Consciousness: Experimental Studies,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (2008): 67–83.

			 9. S. Neville, “Baby Jessica Turns 25 and Unlocks the $800,000 Trust Fund Well-Wishers Donated After Her Horrific Ordeal Stuck in a Well,” Daily Mail, March 26, 2011, www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1370116/Baby-Jessica-turns-25-unlocks-800-000-trust-fund-wishers-donated-horrific-ordeal-stuck-well.html.

			 10. World Hunger Education Service, “2015 World Hunger and Poverty Facts and Statistics,” WorldHunger.org, updated March 24, 2015, www.worldhunger.org/articles/Learn/world%20hunger%20facts%202002.htm.

			 11. D. A. Small and G. Loewenstein, “Helping a Victim or Helping the Victim: Altruism and Identifiability,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26 (2003): 5–16.

			 12. T. S. Rai, “Corporations Are Cyborgs: Organizations That Can Think But Cannot Feel Elicit Anger as Villains But Fail to Elicit Sympathy as Victims,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 126 (January 2015): 18–26.

			 13. P. Rucker, “Mitt Romney Says ‘Corporations Are People,’” Washington Post, August 11, 2011, www.washingtonpost.com/politics/mitt-romney-says-corporations-are-people/2011/08/11/gIQABwZ38I_story.html.

			 14. Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, 130 S. Ct. 876, 2010, www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/09pdf/08-205.pdf.

			 15. “Attack in B Minor for Strings,” The Colbert Report, Comedy Central, January 16, 2012.

			 16. C. Smythe, “HSBC Judge Approves $1.9B Drug-Money Laundering Accord,” Bloomberg, July 3, 2013, www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-07-02/hsbc-judge-approves-1-9b-drug-money-laundering-accord.html.

			 17. “Questions About the 9/11 Attacks? 9/11 Truth Movement?,” 911Truth.org, www.911truth.org/.

			 18. K. Adachi, “Vaccine Dangers,” Educate-Yourself, http://educate-yourself.org/vcd/.

			 19. J. Knobe, “Intentional Action and Side Effects in Ordinary Language,” Analysis 63 (2003): 190–93.

			 20. “Deputies: At Least 5 Teens Beat Homeless Man,” News 4 JAX, October 14, 2011, www.news4jax.com/news/Deputies-At-Least-5-Teens-Beat-Homeless-Man/1915874.

			 21. S. S. Wiltermuth and C. Heath, “Synchrony and Cooperation,” Psychological Science 20 (2009): 1–5.

			 22. S. Wiltermuth, “Synchrony and Destructive Obedience,” Social Influence 7 (2012): 78–89.

			 23. M. Lea, R. Spears, and D. de Groot, “Knowing Me, Knowing You: Anonymity Effects on Social Identity Processes Within Groups,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 27 (2001): 526–37.

			 24. P. A. Ellison et al., “Anonymity and Aggressive Driving Behavior: A Field Study,” Journal of Social Behavior & Personality 10 (1995): 265–72.

			 25. G. Charness and U. Gneezy, “What’s in a Name? Anonymity and Social Distance in Dictator and Ultimatum Games,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 68 (2008): 29–35.

			 26. E. Donnerstein et al., “Variables in Interracial Aggression: Anonymity, Expected Retaliation, and a Riot,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 22 (1972): 236–45.

			 27. A. Silke, “Deindividuation, Anonymity, and Violence: Findings from Northern Ireland,” Journal of Social Psychology 143 (2003): 493–99.

			 28. Kaipotainment, “X-Men Origins: Wolverine Cat,” YouTube, February 14, 2014, www.youtube.com/watch?v=3d4XMUYj-9k#aid=P-t9eoF1XJ8.

			 29. “Rafael Morelos, Gay Washington Teen, Commits Suicide After Reportedly Enduring Anti-Gay Bullying, Cyberbullying,” Huffington Post, February 6, 2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/06/rafael-morelos-gay-washington-suicide_n_1258471.html.

			 30. A. D. Santana, “Virtuous or Vitriolic: The Effect of Anonymity on Civility in Online Newspaper Reader Comment Boards,” Journalism Practice 8 (2014): 18–33.

			 31. P. McGuire, “A Jailbait Loving Perv Destroyed Amanda Todd’s Life,” Vice, October 15, 2012, www.vice.com/read/a-jailbait-loving-perv-destroyed-amanda-todds-life; C. Sieczkowski, “Amanda Todd’s Alleged Bully Named by Anonymous After Teen’s Tragic Suicide,” Huffington Post October 16, 2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/16/amanda-todd-bully-anonymous-suicide_n_1969792.html.

			 32. D. Stanglin, “Student Wrongly Tied to Boston Bombings Found Dead,” USA Today, April 25, 2013, www.usatoday.com/story/news/2013/04/25/boston-bombing-social-media-student-brown-university-reddit/2112309/.

			 33. M. Gladwell, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference (New York: Hachette Digital, 2000).

			 34. J. L. Freedman and S. C. Fraser, “Compliance Without Pressure: The Foot-in-the-Door Technique,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 4 (1966): 195–202.

			 35. G. Stanton, “Why Save Darfur Hasn’t Saved Darfur: United to End Genocide is Making All the Same Mistakes,” Genocide Watch, March 11, 2012, www.genocidewatch.org/images/Sudan_12_03_11_Why_Save_Darfur_Didn_t_Save_Darfur.doc.

			 36. K. Lewis, K. Gray, and J. Meierhenrich, “The Structure of Online Activism,” Sociological Science, February 2014.

			 37. “Nonprofits Outspent For-Profits on Prospecting,” NonProfit Times, June 26, 2012, www.thenonprofittimes.com/news-articles/nonprofits-outspent-for-profits-on-prospecting/.

			 38. K. Kristofferson, K. White, and J. Peloza, “The Nature of Slacktivism: How the Social Observability of an Initial Act of Token Support Affects Subsequent Prosocial Action,” Journal of Consumer Research 40 (2014): 1149–66.

			 39. M. Ringelmann, “Recherches sur les moteurs animes travail de l’homme,” Annales de l’Institut national agronomique 12 (1913): 1–40.

			 40. B. Latane, K. Williams, and S. Harkins, “Many Hands Make Light the Work: The Causes and Consequences of Social Loafing,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (1979): 822.

			 41. C. Bergin, “Remembering the Mistakes of Challenger,” NASA Spaceflight, January 28, 2007, www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/01/remembering-the-mistakes-of-challenger/; Rogers Commission, Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, June 6, 1986, http://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/v1ch6.htm.

			 42. J. Seabrook, “Crush Point,” New Yorker, February 7, 2011, www.newyorker.com/reporting/2011/02/07/110207fa_fact_seabrook.

			 43. L. Null and J. Lobur, The Essentials of Computer Organization and Architecture (Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2010), http://electro.fisica.unlp.edu.ar/arq/downloads/Bibliografia/Linda%20Null%20-%20Essentials%20of%20Computer%20Organization%20and%20Architecture%202003.pdf.

			 44. I. Scharf, T. Pamminger, and S. Foitzik, “Differential Response of Ant Colonies to Intruders: Attack Strategies Correlate with Potential Threat,” Ethology 117 (2011): 731–39.

			 45. J. L. Deneubourg et al., “The Self-Organizing Exploratory Pattern of the Argentine Ant,” Journal of Insect Behavior 3 (1990): 159–68.

			 46. W. M. Wheeler, “The Ant-Colony as an Organism,” Journal of Morphology 22 (1911): 307–25.

			 47. N. R. Franks et al., “Reconnaissance and Latent Learning in Ants,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274 (2007): 1505–9.

			 48. Wheeler, “Ant-Colony as an Organism.”

			 49. F. Galton, “Vox Populi,” Nature 75 (1907): 450–51.

			 50. M. Horowitz, “Good Judgment in Forecasting International Affairs (and an Invitation for Season 3),” Washington Post, November 26, 2013, www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2013/11/26/good-judgment-in-forecasting-international-affairs-and-an-invitation-for-season-3/.

			 51. P. E. Tetlock, B. A. Mellers, and D. Moore, “The Good Judgment Project,” www.goodjudgmentproject.com/index.html; A. Spiegel, “So You Think You’re Smarter Than a CIA Agent,” Morning Edition, NPR, April 2, 2014, www.npr.org/blogs/parallels/2014/04/02/297839429/-so-you-think-youre-smarter-than-a-cia-agent.


CHAPTER 8: THE DEAD

			 1. Social Security Administration, “Top Names Over the Last 100 Years,” 2014, www.ssa.gov/oact/babynames/decades/century.html.

			 2. D. L. Hoyert et al., “Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2011,” National Vital Statistics Reports 61 (2012): 1–51.

			 3. J. M. Bering, “The Folk Psychology of Souls,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29 (2006): 453–62; J. Bering, The Belief Instinct: The Psychology of Souls, Destiny, and the Meaning of Life (New York: W. W. Norton, 2012); J. M. Bering and D. F. Bjorklund, “The Natural Emergence of Reasoning About the Afterlife as a Developmental Regularity,” Developmental Psychology 40 (2004): 217–33.

			 4. P. Bloom, Descartes’ Baby: How the Science of Child Development Explains What Makes Us Human (New York: Basic Books, 2004).

			 5. V. A. Kuhlmeier, P. Bloom, and K. Wynn, “Do 5-Month-Old Infants See Humans as Material Objects?,” Cognition 94 (2004): 95–103.

			 6. J. Pike, “STAR GATE [Controlled Remote Viewing],” FAS.org, 2005, www.fas.org/irp/program/collect/stargate.htm.

			 7. J. McMoneagle, Memoirs of a Psychic Spy: The Remarkable Life of U.S. Government Remote Viewer 001 (Newburyport, MA: Hampton Roads, 2006).

			 8. “TBS’s 1989 ‘$1,000 Challenge’ Test of Local ‘Psychic’ Joan Morin,” Tampa Bay Skeptics Report, Fall 1989, www.tampabayskeptics.org/Morin.html.

			 9. J. M. Bering, C. H. Blasi, and D. F. Bjorklund, “The Development of Afterlife Beliefs in Religiously and Secularly Schooled Children,” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 23 (2005): 587–607.

			 10. Bering and Bjorklund, “Natural Emergence of Reasoning About the Afterlife.”

			 11. K. Gray, T. A. Knickman, and D. M. Wegner, “More Dead Than Dead: Perceptions of Persons in the Persistent Vegetative State,” Cognition 121 (2011): 275–80.

			 12. B. Brier, Valley of the Kings, in The New Book of Knowledge (New York: Scholastic, 2005), http://scholastic.com/browse/article.jsp?id=3753817.

			 13. D. Harrison and K. Svensson, Vikingaliv (Stockholm: Natur och Kultur, 2007).

			 14. G. McEntyre, “Man Buried Upright on Harley-Davidson,” KSDK.com, January 31, 2014, http://ksdk.com/story/news/local/2014/01/31/bill-standley-buried-on-harley-davidson/5095369/.

			 15. S. Nichols, “Imagination and Immortality: Thinking of Me,” Synthese 159 (2007): 215–33.

			 16. B. B. Hagerty, “Decoding the Mystery of Near-Death Experiences,” All Things Considered, NPR, May 22, 2009, www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=104397005; K. Broome, “The Day I Died,” BBC documentary, 2002.

			 17. T. Burpo, Heaven Is for Real (Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, 2010); “Heaven Is for Real,” Fox & Friends, November 15, 2010, http://video.foxnews.com/v/4419243/heaven-is-for-real/#sp=show-clips.

			 18. D. Mobbs and C. Watt, “There Is Nothing Paranormal About Near-Death Experiences: How Neuroscience Can Explain Seeing Bright Lights, Meeting the Dead, or Being Convinced You Are One of Them,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 15 (2011): 447–49.

			 19. N. A. Tassell-Matamua, “Near-Death Experiences and the Psychology of Death,” OMEGA: Journal of Death and Dying 68 (2013): 259–77.

			 20. D. MacDougall, “21 Grams: Hypothesis Concerning Soul Substance Together with Experimental Evidence of the Existence of Such Substance,” Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research 1 (1907): 237–62.

			 21. E. Becker, The Denial of Death (New York: Free Press, 1997).

			 22. “Salmon: Running the Gauntlet,” Nature, PBS, May 1, 2011, www.pbs.org/wnet/nature/lessons/the-lifecycle-of-salmon/enhanced-video-resource/7395/.

			 23. K. D. Roeder, “An Experimental Analysis of the Sexual Behavior of the Praying Mantis (Mantis religiosa L.),” Biological Bulletin 69 (1935): 203–20.

			 24. S. Freud, “Our Attitude Towards Death,” in Reflections on War and Death, trans. A. A. Brill and A. B. Kuttner (New York: Moffat, Yard & Co., 1918), www.bartleby.com/282/2.html.

			 25. J. Greenberg et al., “Evidence for Terror Management Theory II: The Effects of Mortality Salience on Reactions to Those Who Threaten or Bolster the Cultural Worldview,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 58 (1990): 308–18.

			 26. E. A. W. Budge, The History of Alexander the Great, Being the Syriac Version, Edited from Five Manuscripts of the Pseudo-Callistehenes with an English Translation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1889).

			 27. J. L. Barger et al., “A Low Dose of Dietary Resveratrol Partially Mimics Caloric Restriction and Retards Aging Parameters in Mice,” PLOS ONE 3 (2008): e2264.

			 28. J. Liu and A. Mori, “Stress, Aging, and Brain Oxidative Damage,” Neurochemical Research 24 (1999): 1479–97.

			 29. C.-K. Lee et al., “Gene Expression Profile of Aging and Its Retardation by Caloric Restriction,” Science 285 (1999): 1390–93.

			 30. B. W. Penninx et al., “Effects of Social Support and Personal Coping Resources on Mortality in Older Age: The Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam,” American Journal of Epidemiology 146, no. 6 (1997): 510–19.

			 31. D. Buettner, “The Island Where People Forget to Die,” New York Times, October 24, 2012, MM36.

			 32. N. A. Heflick and J. L. Goldenberg, “No Atheists in Foxholes: Arguments for (But Not Against) Afterlife Belief Buffers Mortality Salience Effects for Atheists: Atheism and Mortality Salience,” British Journal of Social Psychology 51 (2012): 385–92.

			 33. J. Cohen, et al., “Influence of Physicians’ Life Stances on Attitudes to End-of-Life Decisions and Actual End-of-Life Decision-Making in Six Countries,” Journal of Medical Ethics 34 (2008): 247–53.

			 34. S. Sharp, D. Carr, and C. Macdonald, “Religion and End-of-Life Treatment Preferences: Assessing the Effects of Religious Denomination and Beliefs,” Social Forces 91 (2012): 275–98.

			 35. A. Norenzayan and I. G. Hansen, “Belief in Supernatural Agents in the Face of Death,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 32 (2006): 174–87.

			 36. T. Pyszczynski et al., “Whistling in the Dark: Exaggerated Consensus Estimates in Response to Incidental Reminders of Mortality,” Psychological Science 7 (1996): 332–36.

			 37. “Clip: Flag Desecration Amendment Debate,” C-SPAN, June 28, 1995, www.c-span.org/video/?c3879314/clip-flag-desecration-amendment-debate.

			 38. J. Greenberg et al., “Sympathy for the Devil: Evidence that Reminding Whites of Their Mortality Promotes More Favorable Reactions to White Racists,” Motivation and Emotion 25 (2001): 113–33.

			 39. J. Arndt et al., “To Belong or Not to Belong, That is the Question: Terror Management and Identification with Gender and Ethnicity,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83 (2002): 26–43.

			 40. A. Rosenblatt et al., “Evidence for Terror Management Theory: I. The Effects of Mortality Salience on Reactions to Those who Violate or Uphold Cultural Values,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57 (1989): 681–90.

			 41. J. T. Jost et al., “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition,” Psychological Bulletin 129 (2003): 339–75.

			 42. K. R. Truett, “Age Differences in Conservatism,” Personality and Individual Differences 14 (1993): 405–11.

			 43. D. Eylon and S. T. Allison, “The ‘Frozen in Time’ Effect in Evaluations of the Dead,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31 (2005): 1708–17.

			 44. S. T. Allison et al., “The Demise of Leadership: Positivity and Negativity Biases in Evaluations of Dead Leaders,” Leadership Quarterly 20 (2009): 115–29.


CHAPTER 9: GOD

			 1. B. Pascal, “Of the Means of Belief,” in Pensées (1669; Harvard Classics, 1909–14), www.bartleby.com/48/1/4.html.

			 2. J. Rée, “In Our Time’s Greatest Philosopher Vote,” BBC Radio, www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/history/inourtime/greatest_philosopher_soren_kierkegaard.shtml.

			 3. Pascal, “Of the Means of Belief.”

			 4. H. M. Gray, K. Gray, and D. M. Wegner, “Dimensions of Mind Perception,” Science 315 (2007): 619.

			 5. J. L. Barrett and A. H. Johnson, “The Role of Control in Attributing Intentional Agency to Inanimate Objects,” Journal of Cognition and Culture 3 (2003): 208–17; J. L. Barrett, “Exploring the Natural Foundations of Religion,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4 (2000): 29–34; K. Barnes and N. J. S. Gibson, “Supernatural Agency: Individual Difference Predictors and Situational Correlates,” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 23 (2012): 42–62.

			 6. L. Hearn, “Jikininki,” in Kwaidan: Ghost Stories and Strange Tales of Old Japan (Dover Publications, 1932), 176, available at www.sacred-texts.com/shi/kwaidan/kwai08.htm.

			 7. “Keres,” Theoi Greek Mythology, www.theoi.com/Daimon/Keres.html.

			 8. S. E. Guthrie, Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).

			 9. S. Nasar, “The Lost Years of a Nobel Laureate,” New York Times, November 13, 1994, available at www.nytimes.com/1994/11/13/business/the-lost-years-of-a-nobel-laureate.html?pagewanted=print&src=pm.

			 10. W. Smith, “Haruspices,” in A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (London: John Murray, 1875), available at http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/secondary/SMIGRA*/Haruspices.html.

			 11. L. G. Healy, “Jesus Cheese Toast,” GoUpstate.com, April 22, 2009, www.goupstate.com/article/20090422/ARTICLES/904221068.

			 12. KENS 5 staff, “‘Blessing from God’: Texas Man Finds Jesus on Breakfast Taco,” KENS5 Eyewitness News San Antonio, August 8, 2012, www.kens5.com/news/Beeville-man-finds-Jesus-in-breakfast-taco-165198506.html.

			 13. A. Knutson, “22 People Who Found Jesus in Their Food,” BuzzFeed Life, March 29, 2013, www.buzzfeed.com/arielknutson/people-who-found-jesus-in-their-food.

			 14. R. Boyd and P. J. Richerson, “Culture and the Evolution of Human Cooperation,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364 (2009): 3281–88.

			 15. D. Abel, “In Canada, Cod Remain Scarce Despite Ban,” Boston Globe, March 4, 2012, available at www.boston.com/news/local/massachusetts/articles/2012/03/04/in_canada_cod_remain_scarce_despite_ban/; A. M. Spooner, Environmental Science for Dummies (Hoboken, NJ: For Dummies, 2012); M. Bergman, Tax Evasion and the Rule of Law in Latin America: The Political Culture of Cheating and Compliance in Argentina and Chile (University Park, PA.: Penn State University Press, 2011).

			 16. K. D. Williams, Ostracism: The Power of Silence (New York: Guilford Press, 2002).

			 17. R. Dunbar, Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998).

			 18. A. F. Shariff and A. Norenzayan, “God Is Watching You: Priming God Concepts Increases Prosocial Behavior in an Anonymous Economic Game,” Psychological Science 18 (2007): 803–9.

			 19. A. F. Shariff, A. Norenzayan, and J. Henrich, “The Birth of High Gods: How the Cultural Evolution of Supernatural Policing Influenced the Emergence of Complex, Cooperative Human Societies, Paving the Way for Civilization,” in Evolution, Culture, and the Human Mind, ed. M. Schaller et al. (New York: Psychology Press, 2009), 119–36, www.psypress.com/evolution-culture-and-the-human-mind-9780805859119.

			 20. Ibid.

			 21. W. M. Gervais and A. Norenzayan, “Like a Camera in the Sky? Thinking About God Increases Public Self-Awareness and Socially Desirable Responding,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 48 (2012): 298–302.

			 22. N. Forsyth, The Old Enemy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989).

			 23. A. F. Shariff and M. Rhemtulla, “Divergent Effects of Beliefs in Heaven and Hell on National Crime Rates,” PLOS ONE 7 (2012): e39048.

			 24. L. Saad, “In U.S., 22% Are Hesitant to Support a Mormon in 2012,” Gallup.com, June 20, 2011, www.gallup.com/poll/148100/Hesitant-Support-Mormon-2012.aspx.

			 25. W. M. Gervais, A. F. Shariff, and A. Norenzayan, “Do You Believe in Atheists? Distrust Is Central to Anti-Atheist Prejudice,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 101 (2011): 1189–206; P. Edgell, J. Gerteis, and D. Hartmann, “Atheists as ‘Other’: Moral Boundaries and Cultural Membership in American Society,” American Sociological Review 71 (2006): 211–34.

			 26. Gervais, Shariff, and Norenzayan, “Do You Believe in Atheists?”

			 27. “Atheism and Morality,” Conservapedia, www.conservapedia.com/Atheism_and_morality.

			 28. J. L. Preston and R. S. Ritter, “Different Effects of Religion and God on Prosociality with the Ingroup and Outgroup,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39 (2013): 1471–83.

			 29. Z. K. Rothschild, A. Abdollahi, and T. Pyszczynski, “Does Peace Have a Prayer? The Effect of Mortality Salience, Compassionate Values, and Religious Fundamentalism on Hostility Toward Out-Groups,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 45 (2009): 816–27.

			 30. L. B. Whitbeck and V. Gecas, “Value Attributions and Value Transmission Between Parents and Children,” Journal of Marriage and Family 50 (1988): 829–40.

			 31. H. Yin Wong and B. Merrilees, “The Performance Benefits of Being Brand‐Orientated,” Journal of Product & Brand Management 17 (2008): 372–83.

			 32. P. F. Stack, “Mormonism Leading Way in U.S. Religious Growth,” Salt Lake Trubune, May 2, 2012, http://sltrib.com/sltrib/news/54026798-78/lds-religious-church-largest.html.csp.

			 33. Ibid.

			 34. R. W. Walker, R. E. Turley, and G. M. Leonard, Massacre at Mountain Meadows (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).

			 35. N. F. Cott, “Young Women in the Second Great Awakening in New England,” Feminist Studies 3 (1975): 15–29.

			 36. T. Smith, General Social Survey, 2012, www.marketplace.org/topics/wealth-poverty/income-upshot/behind-data-belief-god-and-income.

			 37. K. Laurin, A. Kay, and D. A. Moscovitch, “On the Belief in God: Towards an Understanding of the Emotional Substrates of Compensatory Control,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44 (2008): 1559–62.

			 38. J. M. Bering and B. D. Parker, “Children’s Attributions of Intentions to an Invisible Agent,” Developmental Psychology 42 (2006): 253–62.

			 39. D. Kelemen, “Why Are Rocks Pointy? Children’s Preference for Teleological Explanations of the Natural World,” Developmental Psychology 35 (1999): 1440–52.

			 40. F. Newport, “In U.S., 46% Hold Creationist View of Human Origin,” Gallup Politics, June 1, 2012, www.gallup.com/poll/155003/Hold-Creationist-View-Human-Origins.aspx.

			 41. Hastings, H. L., Was Moses mistaken: Or, creation and evolution. (Boston, MA: Scriptural Tract Repository, 1893).

			 42. B. Murphy, “Tsunami Survivors Cling Tightly to Faith Across Ravaged Region,” Baylor Media Communications, 2005, www.baylor.edu/mediacommunications/index.php?id=25982.

			 43. D. Montanaro, “Robertson on Haiti: ‘Pact to the Devil,’” NBC News, January 13, 2010, http://firstread.nbcnews.com/_news/2010/01/13/4436174-robertson-on-haiti-pact-to-the-devil?lite.

			 44. Murphy, “Tsunami Survivors Cling Tightly to Faith Across Ravaged Region.”

			 45. P. Rozin and E. B. Royzman, “Negativity Bias, Negativity Dominance, and Contagion,” Personality and Social Psychology Review 5 (2011): 296–320; J. Kiley Hamlin, K. Wynn, and P. Bloom, “Three-Month-Olds Show a Negativity Bias in Their Social Evaluations: Social Evaluation by 3-Month-Old Infants,” Developmental Science 13 (2010): 923–29; J. J. Skowronski and D. E. Carlston, “Negativity and Extremity Biases in Impression Formation: A Review of Explanations,” Psychological Bulletin 105 (1989): 131–42; A. Vaish, T. Grossmann, and A. Woodward, “Not All Emotions Are Created Equal: The Negativity Bias in Social-Emotional Development,” Psychological Bulletin 134 (2008): 383–403; C. K. Morewedge, “Negativity Bias in Attribution of External Agency,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 138 (2009): 535–45.

			 46. A. C. Kay et al., “God and the Government: Testing a Compensatory Control Mechanism for the Support of External Systems,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 95 (2008): 18–35.

			 47. S. Harrison, “Proverbs 3.5–6, Sort Of,” Google Prayers, www.thechurchofgoogle.org/Scripture/google_prayers.html.

			 48. J. L. Barrett and F. C. Keil, “Conceptualizing a Nonnatural Entity: Anthropomorphism in God Concepts,” Cognitive Psychology 31 (1996): 219–47.

			 49. Westboro Baptist Church, “God Hates Fags,” 2014, www.godhatesfags.com/.

			 50. Javon, “If You’re a Gay Christian, Does God Still Love You?” GayChristian101, www.gaychristian101.com/if-youre-a-gay-christian-does-god-still-love-you.html.

			 51. L. Ross, D. Greene, and P. House, “The ‘False Consensus Effect’: An Egocentric Bias in Social Perception and Attribution Processes,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 13 (1977): 279–301.

			 52. N. Epley et al., “Believers’ Estimates of God’s Beliefs Are More Egocentric Than Estimates of Other People’s Beliefs,” PNAS 106 (2009): 21533–38.

			 53. J. Weiss, “Fathering and Fatherhood,” Encyclopedia of Children and Childhood in History and Society, 2008, www.faqs.org/childhood/Fa-Gr/Fathering-and-Fatherhood.html.

			 54. G. Owens et al., “The Prototype Hypothesis and the Origins of Attachment Working Models: Adult Relationships with Parents and Romantic Partners,” Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 60 (1995): 216–33.

			 55. A. McDonald et al., “Attachment to God and Parents: Testing the Correspondence vs. Compensation Hypotheses,” Journal of Psychology & Christianity 24 (2005): 21–28; L. A. Kirkpatrick, “God as a Substitute Attachment Figure: A Longitudinal Study of Adult Attachment Style and Religious Change in College Students,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 24 (1998): 961–73.

			 56. A. McDonald et al., “Attachment to God and Parents.”

			 57. D. Baillie, “Is There a Creator?” in Through the Wormhole, with Morgan Freeman, producer Geoffrey Sharp, Science (2010).

			 58. N. Gross and S. Simmons, “The Religiosity of American College and University Professors,” Sociology of Religion 70 (2009): 101–29.

			 59. S. J. Gould, “Nonoverlapping Magisteria,” Natural History 106, (1997): 16–22.


CHAPTER 10: THE SELF

			 1. L. Lyon, “7 Criminal Cases That Invoked the ‘Sleepwalking Defense,’” U.S. News & World Report, May 8, 2009, http://health.usnews.com/health-news/family-health/sleep/articles/2009/05/08/7-criminal-cases-that-invoked-the-sleepwalking-defense; J. E. Brody, “When Can Killers Claim Sleepwalking as a Legal Defense?” New York Times, January 16, 1996, C1.

			 2. R. Descartes, A Discourse on Method. Meditations on First Philosophy. Principles of Philosophy (London: Dent, 1981).

			 3. Ibid., 27.

			 4. R. K. Barnhart, Barnhart Concise Dictionary of Etymology (New York: HarperCollins, 1995).

			 5. N. Epley and E. Whitchurch, “Mirror, Mirror on the Wall: Enhancement in Self-Recognition,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34 (2008): 1159–70.

			 6. O. Svenson, “Are We All Less Risky and More Skillful Than Our Fellow Drivers?” Acta Psychologica (Amsterdam) 47 (1981): 143–48.

			 7. J. Kruger and D. Dunning, “Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing One’s Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 (1999): 1121–34.

			 8. J. Krueger, “Enhancement Bias in Descriptions of Self and Others,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 24 (1998): 505–16; M. D. Alicke and O. Govorun, “The Better-Than-Average Effect,” in The Self in Social Judgment, eds. M. D. Alicke, D. A. Dunning, and J. Krueger (New York: Psychology Press, 2005), 304.

			 9. O. P. John and R. W. Robins, “Accuracy and Bias in Self-Perception: Individual Differences in Self-Enhancement and the Role of Narcissism,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 66 (1994): 206.

			 10. W. James, The Principles of Psychology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1890).

			 11. T. Wilson and R. E. Nisbett, “The Accuracy of Verbal Reports About the Effects of Stimuli on Evaluations and Behavior,” Social Psychology 41 (1978): 118.

			 12. A. Bryan, G. Webster, and A. Mahaffey, “The Big, the Rich, and the Powerful: Physical, Financial, and Social Dimensions of Dominance in Mating and Attraction,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 37 (2011): 365–82.

			 13. P. Johansson, “Failure to Detect Mismatches Between Intention and Outcome in a Simple Decision Task,” Science 310 (2005): 116–19.

			 14. M. S. Gazzaniga, The Mind’s Past (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1998).

			 15. R. S. Nickerson, “Confirmation Bias: A Ubiquitous Phenomenon in Many Guises,” Review of General Psychology 2 (1998): 175–220.

			 16. E. Jonas et al., “Confirmation Bias in Sequential Information Search After Preliminary Decisions: An Expansion of Dissonance Theoretical Research on Selective Exposure to Information,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 80 (2001): 557–71; M. Jones and R. Sugden, “Positive Confirmation Bias in the Acquisition of Information,” Theory and Decision 50 (2001): 59–99; J. Klayman, “Varieties of Confirmation Bias,” Psychology of Learning and Motivation 32 (1995): 385–418.

			 17. K. Chow, “Dueling Stereotypes: Bad Asian Drivers, Good at Everything,” Code Switch, July 11, 2013, http://npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2013/07/09/200500744/dueling-stereotypes-bad-asian-drivers-good-at-everything-asiana.

			 18. V. Jones, “Are Blacks a Criminal Race? Surprising Statistics,” Huffington Post, October 5, 2005, http://huffingtonpost.com/van-jones/are-blacks-a-criminal-rac_b_8398.html.

			 19. “The Myth of the Almighty Gun,” Final Call News, April 23, 2013, http://finalcall.com/artman/publish/Perspectives_1/article_9781.shtml.

			 20. S. Milgram, “Behavioral Study of Obedience,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67 (1963): 317–78.

			 21. B. Libet, “Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will in Voluntary Action,” in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 8 (New York: Springer, 1985), 529–66.

			 22. K. Ammon and S. C. Gandevia, “Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Can Influence the Selection of Motor Programmes,” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 53 (1990): 705–7.

			 23. E. Filevich, S. Kühn, and P. Haggard, “There Is No Free Won’t: Antecedent Brain Activity Predicts Decisions to Inhibit,” PLOS ONE 8 (2013): e53053.

			 24. D. C. Dennett, Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984).

			 25. J. D. Greene and J. Cohen, “For the Law, Neuroscience Changes Nothing and Everything,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 359 (2004): 1775–85.

			 26. J. Andenaes, Punishment and Deterrence (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1974).

			 27. Sentencing Council, “Indeterminate Prison Sentences,” http://sentencingcouncil.judiciary.gov.uk/sentencing/indeterminate-prison-sentences.htm.

			 28. K. D. Vohs and J. W. Schooler, “The Value of Believing in Free Will: Encouraging a Belief in Determinism Increases Cheating,” Psychological Science 19 (2008): 49–54.

			 29. D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, Intuitive Prediction: Biases and Corrective Procedures (DTIC document, June 1977), available at http://oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?verb=getRecord&metadataPrefix=html&identifier=ADA047747.

			 30. S. King, “Quitters, Inc.,” in Night Shift (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1978).

			 31. P. M. Gollwitzer and V. Brandstätter, “Implementation Intentions and Effective Goal Pursuit,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73 (1997): 186–99.

			 32. M. Hagger et al., “An Intervention to Reduce Alcohol Consumption in Undergraduate Students Using Implementation Intentions and Mental Simulations: A Cross-National Study,” International Journal of Behavioral Medicine 19 (2012): 82–96.

			 33. P. M. Gollwitzer and G. Oettingen, “The Emergence and Implementation of Health Goals,” Psychological Health 13 (1998): 687–715.

			 34. P. Sheeran and S. Orbell, “Using Implementation Intentions to Increase Attendance for Cervical Cancer Screening,” Health Psychology 19 (2000): 283–89.

			 35. F. Dostoyevsky, “An Essay Concerning the Bourgeois,” in Winter Notes on Summer Impressions, trans. D. Patterson (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1997), 49.

			 36. D. M. Wegner, “Ironic Processes of Mental Control,” Psychological Review 101 (1994): 34–52.

			 37. D. M. Wegner, M. Ansfield, and D. Pilloff, “The Putt and the Pendulum: Ironic Effects of the Mental Control of Action,” Psychological Science 9 (1998): 196–99.

			 38. D. M. Wegner, R. M. Wenzlaff, and M. Kozak, “Dream Rebound: The Return of Suppressed Thoughts in Dreams,” Psychological Science 15 (2004): 232–36.

			 39. D. M. Wegner and D. B. Gold, “Fanning Old Flames: Emotional and Cognitive Effects of Suppressing Thoughts of a Past Relationship,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 68 (1995): 782–92.

			 40. J. W. Schooler, E. D. Reichle, and D. V. Halpern, “Zoning Out While Reading: Evidence for Dissociations Between Experience and Metaconsciousness,” in Thinking and Seeing: Visual Metacognition in Adults and Children (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 203–26.

			 41. M. Killingsworth, “Want to Be Happier? Stay in the Moment” (lecture, TEDxCambridge, Cambridge, MA, November 2011).

			 42. M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: Harper & Row, 1990).

			 43. N. Strohminger and S. Nichols, “The Essential Moral Self,” Cognition 131 (2014): 159–71.

			 44. L. MacFarquhar, “How to Be Good,” New Yorker, September 5, 2011, 43–53.

			 45. D. Parfit, Reasons and Persons (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986).

			 46. D. Shenk, The Forgetting: Alzheimer’s: Portrait of an Epidemic (New York: Doubleday, 2001).

			 47. D. Parfit, Reasons and Persons.

			 48. D. C. Dennett, “The Self as a Center of Narrative Gravity,” in Self and Consciousness: Multiple Perspectives, ed. F. Kessel, P. Cole, and D. Johnson (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1992), available at http://cogprints.org/266/.

			 49. D. T. Suzuki, trans., The Lankavatara Sutra: A Mahayana Text (London: Routledge & K. Paul, 1973).





Index





The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. The link provided will take you to the beginning of that print page. You may need to scroll forward from that location to find the corresponding reference on your e-reader.

			Abyss Creations, 58

			adult humans, and map of mind perception, 12

			advance directives, 183–85

			Aesop, 33

			affective component of pain, 98–99

			affective forecasting, 181–83

			African Americans, stereotyping of, 134–35, 137

			aftermind, 22

			agency

			animalizing and, 132, 133–35

			animals and, 32–39, 41, 43, 49, 50

			complex movement and, 31

			effectors and, 32

			eyes and, 31

			of groups, 205

			machines and, 81

			moral responsibility and, 15

			objectification and, 141–43

			patients and, 109–11

			silence and, 159–60

			in two-dimensional perception of mind, 10–13

			Allahabad, India, 195–97

			Allison, Scott, 256

			All Things Considered (radio show), 145

			Al-Munajjid, Muhammad, 282

			Alzheimer’s, 319

			amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 174–76

			Anderson, Riley, 110

			anencephaly, 190

			animalizing, 132, 133–35

			colonialism and, 133–34

			defined, 132



			slavery and, 133

			stereotypes and, 134–35

			vulnerable feelers and, 133

			animals, 20–21, 25–55

			ability to perceive mental states, 36–38

			agency and, 32–39, 41, 43, 49, 50

			animal rights and, 45–47

			anthropocentrism in perception of animal minds, 28–31

			behaviorist movement criticism of, 38–39

			complex movement and, 31–32

			dancing to a beat by birds and, 35

			denial of mind to animals we eat, 47–48

			dyadic completion and, 51–54

			effectors and, 32

			experience, capacity for, 41–43

			eyes and, 31

			heroism and, 53–54

			intelligence tests and, 32–33

			language and, 39

			loneliness and, 67

			on map of mind perception, 12, 39–40

			morality and, 44–55

			moral responsibility and, 53

			moral rights of, 45–46

			pain, experience of, 46

			“paying it forward” concept, understanding of, 42–43

			rage as response to harming of, 104–5

			reactions and, 32

			self, concept of, 39

			sensors and, 32

			speed of movement and, 28–30

			tools, use of, 33–34

			on trial, 50–51, 53

			as vulnerable feelers, 39, 44, 46, 49

			zoophilia and, 48–50

			The Anita Bryant Story: The Survival of Our Nation’s Families and the Threat of Militant Homosexuality (Bryant), 120

			Anna (technological agent), 66

			anonymity, 216–21

			Anonymous, 218–19

			Antabuse, 311

			anthropocentrism, 28–31

			anthropomorphism, 64–67, 126

			antipathy, 126

			anti-Semitism, 135

			ants, 223

			apophenia, 266–68

			Aquinas, Thomas, 8

			Aristotle, 16

			Arntz, Arnoud, 98

			Asimov, Isaac, 88

			assisted suicide, 179–81

			atheists, 272–73

			Attenborough, David, 28

			autism, 143–46, 190–93

			autism spectrum, 144–45

			automated agents, 64–66

			babies

			on map of mind perception, 12, 14–15

			moral status and, 14–15

			Baby Jessica, 205, 206

			Baby vs. Robot thought experiment, 14

			Backster, Cleve, 27

			baptism, 281

			Baron-Cohen, Simon, 143–44

			Barrett, Lisa Feldman, 140

			Barrett, Michael, 120

			Bartneck, Christoph, 87

			Bastian, Brock, 133

			Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother (Chua), 135–36

			Bauby, Jean-Dominique, 172–73

			bearbaiting, 25–26

			Bear Garden, 25

			Becker, Ernest, 247–48

			Beecher, Henry, 99

			behaviorist movement, 38–39

			benevolent sexism, 142

			Bentham, Jeremy, 10, 46

			Berg, Anthony, 40

			Bering, Jesse, 238, 277

			bigger mind theory, 223–24

			Biklen, Douglas, 191

			Birbaumer, Niels, 176–77, 178

			birds, 33–35. See also crows; ravens; scrub jays

			Blackstone, William, 188–89

			Bleep (dog), 3, 6

			Bloom, Paul, 140, 235

			Bobbitt, John, 93–94, 95, 117

			Bobbitt, Lorena, 93–94, 95

			bonobos, 41, 130–32

			Borges, Jorge Luis, vii

			Bose, J. C., 27

			Boston Marathon bombing, 219

			brain, 161–63

			brain in a vat experiment, 160

			Brandes, Bernd, 180

			Breazeal, Cynthia, 84–85, 86n

			Brief History of Time, A (Hawking), 174

			Brooks, Rodney, 84–85

			Brown, Stephanie, 109

			Brown-Iannuzzi, Jazmin, 138

			Bruno, M., 204–5n

			Bryant, Anita, 119–20

			Buddha, 322

			Bulger, James, 119

			Bump, P., 209–10n

			Burpo, Colton, 243–45

			Bush, George W., 158, 253

			Bush, Jeb, 158–59

			Cairo (dog), 53–54

			Calhoun, John, 133

			Cameron, Daryl, 105

			Carlin, George, 28

			Carpenter, Rollo, 65

			Cast Away (movie), 60–61

			Catholicism, 274, 281

			cats, 32, 38, 41, 46

			causation, and conspiracy theories, 213–14

			Causes (Facebook charity campaign), 219–21

			Chahín, Elías Musiris, 177–78

			Challenger (space shuttle), 221–22

			Chalmers, David, 233

			Change-Up, The (movie), 232

			chem trail theory, 208–9

			Chen, Pauline, 184

			child abuse, 18

			children

			egocentrism in, 100–101

			rage as response to harming of, 104–5

			typecasting, and receiving less blame for misdeeds, 118–19

			chimpanzees, 33, 36–37, 38, 41, 130–32

			Chinese Americans, stereotyping of, 135–36

			choice blindness, 300–301

			Christianity, 274

			Christianity Today, 187

			Christian (lion), 40

			Chua, Amy, 135–36

			Cikara, Mina, 143

			Claassens, Lily, 98

			Clair, Dick, 250

			Cleckley, Hervey, 146

			Cleverbot (technological agent), 74–75

			Clever Hans (horse), 170–71

			Clippy (technological agent), 65

			closure, 200

			Cobain, Kurt, 256–57

			Colbert, Stephen, 208

			cold reading, 230

			colonialism, 133–34

			coma, 166–68

			commitment devices, 311–12

			common fate, 201

			complex movement, 31–32

			concentration, 315–16

			condescension, and animalizing, 135

			conduct disorder, 147

			confirmation bias, 302–3

			Confucius, 16

			conservation of mind, 241–42, 280–81

			conservatism, 253

			consistency, 219–20

			conspecific competition hypothesis, 36–37

			conspiracy theories

			causation and, 213–14

			dyadic completion and, 210–13

			examples of, 208–10

			continuity, 200–201

			control, 62–63, 66–67

			cooperation

			evolutionary importance of, and religious belief, 268–73

			reduction of intergroup hostility fostered by, 152–53

			corporations, 13

			experience, lack of, 205, 207, 208

			inability to suffer of, 208

			on map of mind perception, 13

			Corvidae family. See crows; ravens; scrub jays

			cows, 47

			creationism, 279–80

			“Crow and the Pitcher, The” (Aesop), 33

			crows, 32, 33–34, 37, 46

			cryogenic storage, 249–51

			cryptominds, 6

			Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 316

			Dahl, Roald, 26

			dancing, 35

			Dante Alighieri, 271

			Data (TV show human robot), 83

			Dawkins, Richard, 252

			dead/dead minds, 22, 229–58

			afterlife belief and, 238–40

			conservation of mind, belief in, 241–42

			deathbed requests, honoring of, 257–58

			dominant cultural group, identification with, 253

			exaggeration of moral character after death, 256–57

			ghosts, belief in, 254–55

			good versus evil, in persistence after death, 254–56

			human awareness of own death, 247–48

			identifying people as minds, 232

			impossibility of imagining our minds at death, 242–43

			literal immortality and, 249–51

			maligning of, aversion to, 257

			on map of mind perception, 13

			monism versus dualism in perception of, 233–47

			moral typecasting and continued presence of good/evil people, 255

			persistence of minds of others after death, 231, 254–55

			religion and, 251–52

			stability of minds after death, 255–56

			symbolic immortality and, 252–53

			Terror Management Theory and, 248–53

			De Angeli, Antonella, 65

			deathbed requests, honoring of, 257–58

			Deep Blue (computer), 75

			dehumanization, 21, 126, 132–43

			animalizing, 132, 133–35

			mechanization, 132–33, 135–37

			military training programs and, 151–52

			objectification, 137–43

			deindividuation, 214–15

			Dench, Judi, 83

			Dennett, Daniel, 8–9, 28, 279n, 308, 320

			Descartes, René, 46, 72, 233, 234, 295–96

			DeScioli, Peter, 121

			design stance, and perception of mind, 8

			Devil, 272

			de Waal, Frans, 41

			Dionaea muscipula (Venus fly traps), 27–28

			Disney, 136–37

			divination, 266

			Diving Bell and the Butterfly, The (Bauby), 172–73

			dogs, 12, 32, 37–38, 41, 46, 53–54

			dolphins, 37, 45

			Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 314

			Down syndrome, 190

			drones, 88

			dualism, 22, 233, 234–41

			afterlife belief and, 238–40

			intuitive, 234–40

			near death experiences as evidence for, 245

			persistent vegetative states and, 185–86, 239

			weight loss at death study and, 246

			Dully, Howard, 162

			Dunbar, Robin, 270

			Dunbar’s number, 270

			dyad, 17

			dyadic completion

			agent to patient, 119–23

			animals and, 51–54

			conspiracy theories and, 210–13

			God and, 263, 281–84

			indelible victim effect and, 121–23

			negativity bias in mind perception as part of, 64

			Eberhardt, Jennifer, 143

			Education for Death: The Making of the Nazi (movie), 136–37

			Edward, John, 229–31

			effectors, 32

			Effexor, 98

			egocentrism, 100–101

			Eichmann, Adolf, 137

			Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting (Dennett), 308

			electroencephalography (EEG), 163, 164–65, 167–69, 176–77

			elephants, 41

			Eliza (robot psychotherapist), 76

			Elliott, Jane, 127–28

			emergence, 222–23

			empathy, 21, 102–6, 151

			expressions of vulnerability and, 104

			member/group dichotomy and, 206–7

			overload of, 105–6

			physical closeness and, 103–4

			rage as response to harming of moral patients, 104–5

			enemies, 21, 125–55

			dehumanization and, 126, 132–43, 151–52

			group formation, elements of, 129–30

			identity and, 129

			methods for reducing intergroup hostility, 152–54

			military training programs and, 151–52

			mind perception disorders and, 143–48

			minimal-groups paradigm and, 127–28

			resource competition and, 130–32

			torture and, 125–26, 149, 151

			entitivity, 201–3

			Epley, Nick, 61, 101, 287

			Epstein, Robert, 76–77

			Evangelical Protestantism, 274

			evil/good dyad, 16–20. See also morality/moral status

			evolution

			cooperation in societies, and religious belief, 268–73

			human, versus creationism, 279–81

			supernatural agents, predisposition to detect, 264–66

			experience

			animal’s capacity to, 41–43

			complex movement and, 31

			eyes and, 31

			group’s lack of, 205–9

			humans without, disturbing nature of, 83–84

			machines and, 81–86

			mechanization and, 132–33, 135–37

			moral rights and, 14–15

			objectification and, 141–43

			reactions as proxies for, 32

			sensors and, 32

			silence and, 159–60

			in two-dimensional perception of mind, 10–13

			experience gap, 82–86

			eyes, 31

			Facebook, 219–21

			face-ism, 140

			facilitated communication, 191–93

			factor analysis, 10

			false belief task, 100–101

			false consensus effect, 287

			Falwell, Jerry, 187

			fear, and mechanization, 135

			fetus

			development of, and determining when mind begins, 186–90

			on map of mind perception, 12–13

			pain, conscious experience of, 189

			quickening, and mind perception, 188–89

			viability of, and mind perception, 189

			Fight Club (movie), 311

			Finch, David, 145–46

			Finch, Kristen, 145–46

			Fiske, Susan, 143

			flag burning, 253

			flow, 316–17

			FM-2030, 250

			Freaky Friday (movie), 231–32

			Freemasons, 209

			free will, 304–9

			Freud, Sigmund, 80n, 108, 216, 248, 289

			frogs, and map of mind perception, 12, 46

			functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 163–64, 176–77

			Gage, Phineas, 161

			Galton, Francis, 224

			Gandhi, Mahatma, 110

			Gardner, Wendi, 60

			Garza, Ernesto, 268

			Gazzaniga, Michael, 301

			genocide, 137–38

			Gervais, Will, 272

			gestalt psychology, 198

			ghosts, 254–55

			Gilbert, Daniel, 181n

			God, 22, 261–91

			apophenia and, 266–68

			belief, defined, 263

			as confidant, 287–88

			creationism and, 279–81

			direct experience of, 289–91

			dyadic completion and, 263, 281–84

			evolutionary importance of cooperation and, 268–73

			evolutionary predisposition to detect agents and, 264–66

			false consensus effect and, 287

			functional religions, characteristics of, 273–76

			group coordination and support of war by, 273

			humanlike, perception of God’s mind as, 285–87

			on map of mind perception, 13

			meaning and purpose provided by, 278–80

			as mind, 263–64

			minimal counterintuitiveness and, 275–76

			Pascal’s rational calculation for belief in, 261–62

			sin and punishment as corrective against wrongdoing and, 271–73

			size of society and differences in perception of, 271

			suffering, role in, 281–83

			as thinking doer, 284–85

			wealthy versus poor, and belief in, 277

			God helmet, 289–90

			Gollwitzer, Peter, 312

			good/evil dyad, 16–20. See also morality/moral status

			Good Judgment Project, 225

			Google, 68, 69, 285

			gorillas, 42

			gossip, 129–30

			Gould, Stephen Jay, 291

			grass, 26–27

			Gray, Heather, 9

			great apes, 45–46

			Greenfield-Sanders, Timothy, 141

			group formation, elements of, 129–30

			opportunity for kindness/ cruelty, 129

			reciprocity, 129

			transitivity, 129–30

			groups, 22, 195–226

			accuracy of collective predictions, 224–25

			agency of, 205

			anonymity and, 216–21

			bigger mind theory and, 223–24

			closure and, 200

			common fate and, 201

			conspiracy theories and, 208–14

			continuity and, 200–201

			deindividuation and, 214–15

			emergence and, 222–23

			empathy, and member/group dichotomy, 206–7

			entitivity and, 201–3

			experience, lack of, 205–9

			group think and, 221–22

			identification of, 197–202

			inability to suffer of, 208

			members/group trade-off in mind perception, 202–8

			minds as, 222–24

			moral typecasting, and member/group dichotomy, 207–8

			proximity and, 198–99

			Ringelmann effect and, 221

			similarity and, 199–200

			slacktivism and, 220–21

			synchrony and, 215–16

			as thinking doers, 204–5

			group think, 221–22

			guilty verdicts, 19

			Hall, Lars, 299, 301

			Haslam, Nicholas, 133

			hatred, and mechanization, 135

			Hawking, Stephen, 174

			heartbeat, 160–61

			Heath, Chip, 215–16

			Heaven Is for Real: A Little Boy’s Astounding Story of His Trip to Heaven and Back (Burpo), 244–45

			Hebb, Donald, 38

			Heberlein, Andrea, 145

			Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 233

			Hendrix, Jimi, 256–57

			Henry, John, 250

			Heraclitus, 233

			Her (movie), 83

			heroism

			animals and, 53–54

			insensitivity to pain of heroes, 113–15

			personal power and, 110–11

			robots and, 87–88

			hipsters, 240

			Holocaust, 137–38

			homeless people, 138

			Homeward Bound (movie), 41

			hostile sexism, 142–43

			Hot Chick, The (movie), 232

			HSBC, 208

			Huebner, Bryce, 204–5n

			Huffington Post, 48

			humanlike machines, 77–81

			humanness

			animals and, 30–31

			experience gap and, 82–85

			living/nonliving category boundary, uniqueness of, 79–80

			machines and, 73–77

			Orwell on, 84

			Shakespeare on, 84

			Turing test for, 6–8, 74, 75

			uncanny valley and, 77–79, 81–83

			Hurt Locker, The (movie), 152

			Hutus, 153–54

			Hyde, Henry, 253

			hyperactive agency-detection device (HADD), 264–66

			I Am Not Spock (Nimoy), 112

			I Am Spock (Nimoy), 112

			identity, 129

			Ikea, 66

			Illuminati, 209

			immoral acts, defined, 19

			immortality

			literal, 249–51

			symbolic, 252–53

			implementation intentions, 312–13

			indelible victim effect, 121–23

			Independence Day (movie), 153

			influence, 219

			intelligence tests, for animal, 32–33

			intentional stance, and perception of mind, 8–9

			Internet, and anonymity, 216–19

			intuitive dualism, 234–40

			iPhone, 66

			It’s a Boy Girl Thing (movie), 232

			Jabberwacky (technological agent), 65–66, 74–75

			Jain monks, 25–26

			Japanese Americans, internment of, 137

			Jenkins, Anna, 100, 105, 145

			Jennings, Ken, 75

			Jentsch, Ernst, 80n

			Jeopardy (TV show), 75

			Jews, 135, 137–38, 200, 201

			JFK assassination, 213–14

			Johansson, Petter, 299, 301

			Johansson, Scarlett, 83

			Jonze, Spike, 83

			Joplin, Janis, 256–57

			Judt, Tony, 175–76

			Jung, Carl, 108

			just-world belief, 149–51

			Kanizsa triangle, 52–53

			Kant, Immanuel, 138–39, 143

			Kasparov, Garry, 75

			Keleman, Deborah, 279

			Keller, Helen, 182–83

			Kennedy assassination, 213–14

			Kerry, John, 253

			Kierkegaard, Søren, 263

			Killingsworth, Matthew, 316

			Kinds of Minds (Dennett), 8–9

			King, Stephen, 311–12

			Kismet (robot), 85–86

			Knickman, Annie, 185, 239

			Knobe, Joshua, 140, 204, 211

			Knowles, Megan, 60

			Kratt, Arlene, 179

			Kuhlmeier, Valerie, 235

			Kulniszewski, Paul, 267

			Kurzweil, Ray, 70–71

			language, 39

			Lassie (dog), 53

			Leaf, Jerry, 250

			leprosy, 96–97

			Lewis, Kevin, 130, 220

			Libet, Benjamin, 305–6, 307–8

			life at birth position, 187

			life at conception position, 187

			Like Father Like Son (movie), 232

			literal immortality, 249–51

			living wills, 183–85

			lobotomy, 161–62

			locked-in states, 172–81

			amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and, 174–76

			assisted suicide and, 179–81

			fMRI or EEG as means of communicating with, 176–77

			neural interface techniques for communicating with, 178–79

			Loebner, Hugh, 74

			Loebner Prize, 74

			Logan, Linda, 106, 109

			loneliness, 59–62, 67

			longevity, and caregiving, 109–10

			Lou Gehrig’s disease, 174–76

			Loughnan, Steve, 47, 133

			Lowe, Linda, 268

			Luhrmann, T. M., 288

			Luther, Martin, 135

			MacDougall, Duncan, 246

			Machery, Edouard, 82

			machines, 21, 57–90

			agency and, 81

			anthropomorphism and, 64–67

			control and, 62–63, 66–67

			cruelty to, 65–66

			experience and, 81–86

			experience gap and, 82–85

			humanlike, 77–81

			humanness and, 73–77

			lifelike, historical, 71–73

			loneliness and perception of mind in, 59–62, 67

			melding of human mind with, 68–70

			morality and, 88–89

			moral responsibility of, 88

			moral rights of, 86–87

			negativity bias in mind perception and, 62–64

			robots, 13, 14–15, 77–88

			singularity and, 70–71

			as thinking doers, 88

			uncanny valley and, 77–79, 81–83

			as vulnerable feelers, 86–88

			McCreary, Mauricé, 54

			McLachlan, Sarah, 105

			McMath, Jahi, 5

			McMoneagle, Joseph, 237

			Madonna, 98

			Mandela, Nelson, 134–35

			Mann, Horace, 253

			MARCbot, 87–88

			marines, 203–4

			Marsh, Abby, 147

			Mask of Insanity, The (Hervey), 146

			Matrix, The (movie), 309–10

			mechanization, 132–33, 135–37

			defined, 132–22

			stereotypes and, 135–36

			World War II propaganda and, 136–37

			mechanomorphic, 108–9

			Meierhenrich, Jens, 220

			Meiwes, Armin, 180

			memetics, 274n

			memory, 67–69

			defining Self and, 318–20

			distribution of, 67–68

			search engines as intellectual crutch for, 68–69

			transactive, 67–68

			Mendibil, Claude, 173

			mental illness, 109

			Microsoft, 65

			Miedaner, Terrel, 87

			Milgram, Stanley, 303–4

			military training programs, 151–52

			Mimosa pudica, 27

			mind in the eyes test, 144–45

			mind/mind club

			animals (See animals)

			the dead (See dead/dead minds)

			defined, 3

			enemies (See enemies)

			groups (See groups)

			importance of membership in, 5

			machines (See machines)

			members of, determining, 3–5

			mind survey and, 9–15

			one-dimensional view of mind and, 8–9

			patients (See patients)

			perception of mind (See perception of mind)

			plants and, 26–28

			Self (See Self)

			silent minds (See silent minds)

			mind survey, 9–15

			minimal counterintuitiveness, 275–76

			minimal-groups paradigm, 127–28

			minimally conscious state, 167

			mirror box, 97

			Mitchell, Jason, 100

			Mize, Jim, 268

			Mobbs, Dean, 245

			Momo (cat), 44

			monism, 233–34, 242–43, 247

			Moniz, António, 161

			monkeys, 42–43, 78

			Moon, Youngme, 65

			Moore, Gordon, 70

			Moore’s law, 70

			moral acts, defined, 19

			moral agents. See thinking doers

			morality/moral status, 13–15

			animal and, 44–55

			dyadic nature of, 16–20

			machines and, 88–89

			moral/immoral acts, defined, 19

			moral responsibility and (See moral responsibility)

			moral rights and (See moral rights)

			moral judgment, 19

			moral patients. See vulnerable feelers

			moral responsibility, 14–20

			agency and, 14–15

			of animals, 53

			dyadic completion and (See dyadic completion)

			lack of free will and, 308–9

			of machines, 88

			thinking doers and, 16–20

			moral rights, 14–20

			of animals, 45–46

			experience and, 14–15

			of machines, 86–87

			vulnerable feelers and, 16–20

			moral transformation, 111

			moral typecasting, 111–19

			children as receiving less blame for misdeeds and, 118–19

			continued presence of good/evil people after death and, 255

			defined, 111–12

			insensitivity of heroes/villains to pain and, 113–15

			just-world belief differentiated, 149–51

			member/group dichotomy and, 207–8

			objectification and, 141–43

			others perceived as either moral agents or moral patients, 112–14

			victimhood strategy and, 117–18

			victims, lack of responsibility of, 113–14, 117–19

			Morelos, Rafael, 218

			Morewedge, Carey, 28–29, 63, 64, 203

			Mori, Masahiro, 77, 82

			Mormonism, 274–75

			Morrison, Jim, 256–57

			Morton, Samantha, 83

			murder, 18

			My Lobotomy (Dully), 162

			Mythbusters (TV show), 27

			Nagin, Ray, 282

			Nash, John, 266

			Nass, Clifford, 65

			National Geographic, 196

			natural selection, 264–65

			Nazis, 136–37

			near death experiences (NDEs), 243–46

			negativity bias, in mind perception, 62–64

			neural interface techniques, for communicating with locked-in persons, 178–79

			New Dawn (radio soap opera), 153–54

			New York Times, 151

			Nichols, Shaun, 317

			Nicklinson, Tony, 179–81, 182

			Nilsen, Dennis, 2–3, 6, 46–47

			Nimoy, Leonard, 112

			Nisbett, Richard, 298

			nocebo effect, 98

			Norenzayan, Ara, 271

			Norton, Mike, 130

			Nussbaum, Martha, 139

			Obama, Barack, 134–35

			objectification, 137–43

			genocide and, 137–38

			homeless people and, 138

			sexual, 138–40

			typecasting hypothesis and, 141–43

			obsessions, 314–15

			Odyssey, The (TV show), 166–67

			one-dimensional view of mind, 8–9

			design stance and, 8

			intentional stance and, 8–9

			physical stance and, 8

			opportunity for kindness/cruelty, and group formation, 129

			Orwell, George, 84

			other minds, problem of, 1–3, 183

			Owen, Adrian, 172

			pain, 46, 95–106, 123

			affective component of, 98–99

			empathy and, 102–6

			expectations and, 97–98

			fetus’ experience of, 189

			inability to feel, 96–97

			insensitivity to pain of heroes and villains, 113–15

			nocebo effect and, 98

			other people’s pain, understanding, 99–104

			placebo effect and, 97–98

			sensory component of, 98–99

			Paluck, Betsy Levy, 153, 154

			paracetamol, 98

			parasocial relationships, 59–60

			Parfit, Derek, 318–20

			Parker, Becky, 277

			Parks, Kenneth, 293–95

			Parmenides, 233

			Parnia, Sam, 245

			Pascal, Blaise, 103, 261–62, 263

			paternalism, and animalizing, 135

			patients, 21, 93–123

			agency and, 109–11

			compassion for, 104–5

			defined, 95

			dyadic completion and, 119–123

			empathy and, 102–6

			helping others and, 109–11

			immorality/harm linkage and, 121–23

			medical, 106–9

			moral transformation to agent, 110–11

			moral typecasting and, 111–19

			pain and, 95–106, 113–15

			as vulnerable feelers, 95

			Paxil, 98

			“paying it forward” concept, animal understanding of, 42–43

			Payne, Keith, 105, 138

			People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), 104–5

			perception of mind, 6–7

			anthropocentrism in, 28–31

			autism and, 143–46

			control and, 62–63, 66–67

			creation of mind through perception, 6

			disorders in, 143–48

			eyes and, 31

			loneliness and, 59–62, 67

			map of, 11–13

			moral status and, 13–15

			negativity bias in, 62–64

			one-dimensional view of mind, 8–9

			psycopathy and, 146–48

			speed of movement and, 28–30

			Turing test and, 6–8

			two-dimensional experience/agency view of mind, 9–13

			Persinger, Michael, 289–90

			persistent vegetative state (PVS)

			behavior of patients, clever versus reflexive, 171–72

			dualism and, 185–86, 239

			EEG and, 168

			on map of mind perception, 12–13

			Schiavo case, 157–59

			perspective taking, 122–23

			Pfungst, Oskar, 170–71

			phantom limb pain, 97

			philosophical zombies, 1–2, 160

			Phoenix, Joaquin, 45

			physical stance, and perception of mind, 8

			pigs, 46–47, 50–51

			placebo effect, 97–98

			plants, 26–28

			Poe, Edgar Allen, 161

			Polar Express (movie), 77

			Posada, Jorge, 98

			positive feedback cycle, 70–71

			predictions of groups, accuracy of, 224–25

			Preston, Jesse, 28–29, 273

			Prinz, Jesse, 204

			Private Life of Plants, The (Attenborough), 28

			proximity, 198–99

			Prozac, 98

			psychiatry, 108–9

			psychology, 291, 296–97

			psycopaths, 83, 146–48

			Purpose Driven Life, The (Warren), 279

			Pyszczynski, Tom, 252

			quickening, and mind perception in fetus, 188–89

			“Quitters, Inc.” (King), 311–12

			racial stereotypes

			animalizing and, 134–35

			mechanization and, 135–36

			Rai, Tage, 207

			Ramachandran, V. S., 97

			Ramsey, Erik, 178

			Rand, Dave, 130

			rape, 148–49

			ravens, 33

			RealDoll, 57–59, 61–62

			reciprocity, and group formation, 129

			Reddit, 219

			remote viewing, 237–38

			Rendall, John, 40

			Reptilian theory, 209, 210

			rescues, 18

			resource competition, 130–32

			Reynolds, Pam, 243

			Ringelmann, Maximilien, 221

			Ringelmann effect, 221

			Ritter, Ryan, 273

			Robbers Cave study, 128, 153

			Roberts, Michael, 214–15

			Robertson, Pat, 282

			robots. See also machines

			experience gap and, 82–86

			heroism and, 87–88

			humanlike, 77–81

			on map of mind perception, 13, 14–15

			moral status and, 14–15

			turning off (killing) of, 87

			Rocco (dog), 53–54

			Roe v. Wade, 187

			Romero, Carlos, 48, 62

			Romney, Mitt, 208

			Rutter, Brad, 75

			Rwanda, 153–54

			Salim, Mohamed, 152

			Salinger, J. D., 98

			Sarkissian, H., 204–5n

			Save Darfur Cause, 220

			Schachner, Adena, 35

			Schein, Chelsea, 121, 240, 280–81

			Schiavo, Michael, 157–58

			Schiavo, Terri, 157–59, 162, 169–70

			schizophrenia, 266

			Schooler, Jonathan, 203, 309, 315

			scrub jays, 33, 37

			seals, 46–47

			search engines, 68–69

			Second Great Awakening, 275

			“Secret Miracle, The” (Borges), vii

			Self, 22–23, 293–322

			concentration and, 315–16

			confirmation bias and, 302–3

			defining essence of, 317–21

			existence of own mind, 295–96

			flow and, 316–17

			free will, lack of, 304–9

			how mind works, impossibility of perceiving, 296–97

			memory and, 318–20

			self-control and, 309–13

			self-insight, lack of, 298–302

			thought control and, 313–17

			understanding of own mind, 296

			self-centeredness, 100–101

			self-control, 309–13

			commitment devices and, 311–12

			implementation intentions and, 312–13

			sensors, 32

			sensory component of pain, 98–99

			service animals, 53–54

			sexism, 142–43

			sexual attraction to animals (zoophilia), 48–50

			sexual objectification, 138–40

			Shakespeare, William, 10, 84

			Shane, Howard, 192

			Shariff, Azim, 271, 272

			sheep, 32, 202

			Sheeran, Paschal, 313

			Shenk, David, 319

			Sherif, Mazafer, 128

			silent minds, 21–22, 157–93

			affective forecasting and, 181–83

			agency and, 159–60

			behavior and, 170–72

			brain in a vat experiment and, 160

			brain-mind link and, 161–63

			coma and, 166–68

			determining whether silent entity has a mind, 160–72

			dualism and, 185–86

			EEG and, 163, 164–65, 167–69, 176–77

			experience and, 159–60

			extreme autism and, 190–93

			fetal development, and determining when mind begins, 186–89

			fMRI and, 163–64, 176–77

			heartbeat as evidence of mind and, 161–63



			living wills and, 183–85

			locked-in states and, 172–81

			sleep and, 165–66

			vegetative states and, 12–13, 157–59, 168–69, 171–72, 185–86

			similarity, 199–200

			simulation, 99, 100, 102–3

			Singer, Peter, 103

			singularity, 70–71

			Siri (technological agent), 66

			slacktivism, 220–21

			Slahi, Mohamedou Ould, 125–26, 149

			slavery, 133

			sleep, 165–66

			Smallwood, Jonathan, 315

			Smith, Joseph, 275

			soap operas, and reduction of intergroup hostility, 153–54

			social connection, human need for, 59–60

			social facilitation, 60

			Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), 86, 105

			Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Robots (SPCR), 86–87

			solitary confinement, 59

			sorites paradox, 187–88

			“Sound Machine, The” (Dahl), 26

			Sparrow, Betsy, 69

			speed of movement, and mind perception, 28–30

			Spiner, Brent, 83

			Spinney, Laura, 196

			Spinoza, Baruch, 233

			Spock (TV character), 112

			sponsorship element, of twelve-step programs, 109

			Stalin, Joseph, 112, 205

			Stargate Project, 237–38

			Starship Troopers (movie), 153

			Star Trek: The Next Generation (TV show), 83

			Star Trek (TV show), 112

			Stay-Focused, 311

			Steamboat Willie (movie), 77

			stereotypes

			animalizing and, 134–35

			mechanization and, 135–36

			Stinchfield, Laura, 38n

			Stoics, 10

			Strohminger, Nina, 317

			Stroop task, 69

			Stumbling on Happiness (Gilbert), 181n

			symbolic immortality, 252–53

			synchrony, 215–16

			Sytsma, Justin, 82

			Szasz, Thomas, 108–9

			talk therapy, 109

			Tamagotchi, 62

			Tao Te Ching, 16

			Tavalaro, Julia, 179

			technological agents, 64–66

			teenagers, 43

			“Tell-Tale Heart, The” (Poe), 161

			Terminator, The (movie), 70

			Terror Management Theory, 248–53

			Tetlock, Phil, 225

			theft, 18

			theorizing, 99–100, 102

			thinking doers, 16–20, 94–95

			God as, 284–85

			groups as, 204–5

			helping others as means of becoming, 109–11

			machines and, 88

			mechanization and, 133

			moral typecasting and, 111–19

			vulnerable feelers as complementary opposite, 17

			Thought Translation Device (TTD), 177–78

			timescale anthropocentrism, 28–30

			Todd, Amanda, 218–19

			tool use, by animals, 33–34

			torture, 125–26, 149, 151

			Track Your Happiness (iPhone app), 316

			transactive memory, 67–68

			transitivity, and group formation, 129–30

			Treadwell, Timothy, 40–41

			tree frogs, 12, 46

			Tripathi, Sunil, 219

			Triveni Sangam, 195–97

			Tucholsky, Kurt, 205n

			Turing, Alan, 6, 8, 74

			Turing test, 6–8, 74, 75

			Turk (automaton), 71–72

			Tutsis, 153–54

			twelve-step programs, sponsorship element of, 109

			28 Days Later (movie), 214

			Tylenol, 98

			typecasting, 112. See also moral typecasting

			“Uncanny, The” (Freud), 80n

			uncanny valley, 77–79, 81–83

			urotherapy, 98

			vegetative states, 168–69

			behavior of patients, clever versus reflexive, 171–72

			persistent (See persistent vegetative state (PVS))

			Venus fly traps, 27–28

			viability, and mind perception in fetus, 189

			Vice Versa (movie), 232

			Vick, Michael, 45

			victimhood strategy, 117–18

			victimless wrongs, 122

			Viding, Essi, 147

			villains

			insensitivity to pain of, 113–15

			personal power and, 111

			Vineyard, 288

			Virtual Sexuality (movie), 232

			Vohs, Kathleen, 309

			von Osten, Wilhelm, 170

			vulnerable feelers, 16–20, 94–95

			animalizing and, 133

			animals as, 39, 44, 46, 49

			compassion for, 104–5

			helping others as means of turning into thinking doer, 109–11

			machines as, 86–88

			moral typecasting and, 111–19

			patients as, 95

			thinking doers as complementary opposite, 17

			Walking Dead, The (TV show), 214

			Warren, Rick, 279

			Washburn, Margaret Floy, 5n

			Watson (computer), 7, 75

			Waytz, Adam, 61, 202–3

			we-feeling, 215–16

			Wegner, Dan, viii, 175, 314

			When God Talks (Luhrmann), 288

			While You Were Sleeping (movie), 167–68

			will, 297–98

			Williams, Ted, 250

			Wilson, Tim, 298

			Wiltermuth, Scott, 215–16

			Winehouse, Amy, 256–57

			World War II mechanizing propaganda, 136–37

			World War Z (movie), 214

			X-Files (TV show), 212–13

			XXX: 30 Porn Star Portraits (Greenfield-Sanders), 141

			yin/yang, 16

			Young, Liane, 202–3

			Zebrowitz, Leslie, 119

			zombies, 1–2, 83–84, 214

			philosophical, 1–2, 160

			zoophilia, 48–50





					* The first woman to earn a PhD in psychology, Margaret Floy Washburn, fanned the controversy back in 1908 with a forceful argument in favor of dogs and other animal minds.





					* Alan Turing was interested in all things cryptic and also helped to crack the Nazis’ Enigma cipher during World War II.





					* No relation to Kurt Gray.





					* Though, for safety reasons, ideally not all at the same time.





					* However, if you are from the Discovery Channel and are interested in this idea, please call.





					* The word “dyad” comes from the Greek word dýo and simply means “two.”





					* Our apologies for maligning them in the first chapter.





					* A small, potted, palm tree–like plant found in many offices.





					* Answer: impossibly unlikely.





					* Strongly suggesting that children are simply crows with a belief in magic.





					* Light consists of waves, and the frequency of these waves determines its color.





					* One particular lab uses Marshmallow Fluff to entice primates.





					* Some people—pet psychics—do think they have an amazing ability to read the thoughts of animals. One California pet psychic named Laura Stinchfield will charge you only two hundred dollars per hour to telepathically talk with your pooch (even if it’s dead).





					* In truth, teenagers have a large enough prefrontal cortex but have relatively fewer connections between this neural structure and the rest of their brains.





					* Not that we’re advocating for this.





					* A breed of dog similar to a German shepherd but more compact.





					* “Fuck” was the ninth-highest-ranked word stem.





					* Kasparov was much less gracious than Jennings in defeat and accused IBM of cheating.





					* This idea was first suggested in 1906 by psychologist Ernst Jentsch, who was quoted in Sigmund Freud’s essay “The Uncanny.”





					* There is a tendency to call Kismet “he,” but its creator, Cynthia Breazeal, carefully refers to it as “it,” steadfastly avoiding anthropomorphism.





					* Of course, Kurt technically has a “doctorate,” but when someone calls out, “Is there a doctor!?” they are rarely looking for some emergency help with experiments on mind perception.





					* Did “villains” write about true evilness? You bet. One person wrote about taking the pen, stabbing the male research assistant in the neck, and then sexually assaulting the female research assistant. Add one point for experimental validity, and subtract a million points for human nature.





					* Her catchphrase was “Breakfast without orange juice is like a day without sunshine.”





					* Bryant and Barrett were prescient: History shows that gay rights lead to famine, nuclear war, and anarchy. Or perhaps instead to reduced crime and rising property values. D. Christafore and S. Leguizamon, “The Influence of Gay and Lesbian Coupled Households on House Prices in Conservative and Liberal Neighborhoods,” Journal of Urban Economics 71 (2012): 258–67.





					* To see for yourself, you can visit www.mpmlab.org/groups.





					* Rumor has it that Kant died a virgin.





					* He is also the cousin of the entertainer Sacha Baron Cohen, aka Ali G, aka Borat, aka Brüno.





					* German Battalion 371 defeated the Royal Welch Fusiliers, 2–1.





					* It is also a universal truth that plots involving comas are always elaborate and confusing.





					* Only kidding—his ability in calculus was untested.





					* Also often referred to as Lou Gehrig’s disease, after the baseball player who died from it at age thirty-seven.





					* Latin for “bridge,” this brain region helps relay signals from other neural areas.





					* For a full discussion of the inadequacy of imagination, we encourage you to read Daniel Gilbert’s Stumbling on Happiness.





					* In ancient Greek, sorites means “heaped up.”





					* One of these replications was conducted in our lab and written up in a paper entitled “Clever Hands,” in a nod to the power of perception revealed in the case of the horse Clever Hans.





					* Not a real pop band . . . yet.





					* Proximity within a virtual space, such as in a World of Warcraft guild, is a matter of perception.





					* Bryce Huebner, a philosopher at Georgetown University, and his colleagues have found similar results when asking about the nation of China. B. Huebner, M. Bruno, and H. Sarkissian, “What Does the Nation of China Think About Phenomenal States?” Review of Philosophy and Psychology 1 (2009): 225–43.





					* This quote is in fact from Französischer Witz, by Kurt Tucholsky. A French diplomat says, “The war? I can’t find it too terrible! The death of one man: that is a catastrophe. One hundred thousand deaths: That is a statistic!”





					* No joke—4 percent of American voters believe in the existence of Reptilians, according to a 2013 Public Policy Polling poll. P. Bump, “12 Million Americans Believe Lizard People Run Our Country,” The Wire, April 2, 2013, http://www.thewire.com/national/2013/04/12-million-americans-believe-lizard-people-run-our-country/63799/.





					* That is, the plane crash that claimed the lives of Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper, and Ritchie Valens.





					* Despite looking totally crazy.





					* “Mono-,” the English prefix for “one,” is derived from the Greek monos, which means “alone, only, single.” Other appropriate uses of the word include “That lady with fourteen cats will forever be a monist.”





					* Admittedly, Jesus’ rainbow horse isn’t in the Bible.





					* Of course, we know that all dogs go to heaven (just ask Pope Francis), and souls are necessary for this spiritual journey.





					* These discussions about death ensure that we never get asked to babysit.





					* A Greek island that boasts more healthy nonagenarians than anywhere else on Earth.





					* The actual quote begins, “Be ashamed to die until you have won some victory for humanity.”





					* Oh my.





					* An onion-flavored corn snack made by Frito-Lay.





					* This idea is called memetics, treating ideas (i.e., memes) through the framework of genetics and natural selection.





					* In the terms of philosopher Daniel Dennett (mentioned in chapter 1), we can take a “design” stance with the can opener.





					* Potassium, a relatively common element in rocks, decays over millions of years into the gas argon, which remains trapped in the crystal lattice of rocks until cracked open by geochronologists (geologists who specialize in dating minerals). Kurt majored in earth science before switching to psychology.





					* See www.thechurchofgoogle.org.





					* If you are pretentious, or just into brevity, you might prefer the Latin: Cogito ergo sum.





					* Yes, that means that there is a fifty-fifty chance that you are below average in lovemaking ability.





					* Pronounced “Mee-hy Cheek-sent-mə-hy-ee.”





What’s next on

your reading list?


				Discover your next

great read!



* * *



				Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

				Sign up now.








